---
layout: post
title: Seminar Week 13
tags:
- inst888
- study
- hci
- design
- repair
---


This week we looked at accessible technology design with our professor, Leah
Findlater. Leah has done a pretty amazing job of remaining as neutral as
possible to the topic of conversation each week, which isn't easy to do without
sacrificing vigorous discussion. So it was great to hear her present about 
accessible technology, which is a research area she is directly involved in, 
and cares deeply about.

I think we used the term [assistive technology] more 
than *accessible* technology. I can't remember if it we discussed the point, 
but assistive seems like a more precise term to me. It speaks to what the
technoology is actually doing (helping a human) rather than providing *access*
to something. Generally speaking the people have some sort of disability, 
or impairment that prevents them from performing some class of activities.

We read three papers: @Shinohara:2011, @Bigham:2010 and @Anthony:2013.
After a general presentation about the field of accessible technologies we dove
into talking about the paper that Leah co-authored. This paper was interesting
because of its methodological approach: using social media video content
(YouTube) as an alternative to interviews, as evidence of how people with 
motor impairments use touch screen devices. YouTube provided a great
deal more content (187 videos) than normally could be collected during more
traditional interviews.

The study raises interesting methodological challenges about using a platform
like YouTube in research. How are candidate videos identified? How do you
document the process by which they are identified? When do you stop collection?
How do you think about what has not been identified. How do you enter into
conversation with the content creators? 

We actually watched some of the videos that were used in the study. It was quite
moving and inspiring to see the disabled individuals coming up with novel and
creative ways of interacting with touchscreen devices. It was also heartbreaking
to see how simple things like non-responsiveness to pressure from finger nails
caused breakdowns in use.

The inventiveness of solutions, such as the use of simple felt borders to
contain contact to particular regions, were striking in their inventiveness. The
creative process reminded me a bit of [hacking] in computer culture, where the
limitations of software tools are overcome through creative disassembling and
reassembling of components, features and functionality.

I think I gravitated to issues like this because of my interest in software
development and using social media streams from Twitter as research material. 
Also, it hadn't occurred to me until discussing the readings, but the creative
design process exhibited in many of the videos reminded me a lot of Steven
Jackson's idea of [repair] as a site for design: Broken World Thinking.

A few significant points specifically related to assistive technology were:

* Because there are less individuals with disabilities, and there is a diversity
  of disabilities themselves, they can be logistically harder to study as a 
  population than "main stream" users.
* Assistive technology can sometimes be difficult to produce because the markets
  are smaller.
* Interactions are often proxied through care givers, family members who for
  example, created YouTube videos and uploaded them on behalf of the research 
  subjects.
* There can be social stigmas associated with technical solutions in this space,
  so there is great value in mainstreaming the tech, as Apple has done with
  making assistive technologies [built right in].
* It is always important to remember that creative ways for unimpaired users to
  simulate a disability (for example covering one's eyes to simulate blindness)
  are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to living with a particular
  disability. They should be used with attention and respect.

[assistive technology]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assistive_technology
[hacking]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_culture
[repair]: /tag/repair/
[built right in]: http://www.apple.com/accessibility/

## References



