---
layout: post
title: Seminar Week 14
tags:
- inst888
- development
- repair

---

In the final week of of the first part of INST 888 we discussed Information 
Technology and Communication for Development or [ICT4D]. We were visited by
[Arunesh Mathur], who is a future PhD student in the iSchool. We also read three
papers on the subject: @Toyama:2010, @Wyche:2013, @Toyama:2013. Arunesh had
worked previously at Microsoft Research in Bangalore, India on the development 
of an [offline] version of Wikipedia where bandwidth was limited.
[Kentaro Toyama], the author of two of the papers, helped found Microsoft
Research in Bangalore. In addition Leah Findlater (our professor) spent 
some time at the same center.

We had a pretty heated discussion of the @Wyche:2013 article, mostly centered on
methodological issues. The big assumption in the paper seemed to be that
Facebook use in India was something worth studying: that people in India
actually needed or valued it. There was some uncertainty about the ethics of
hanging out in internet cafe's and observing people to see if they were using
Facebook, and then entering into an interview conversation with them. There are
all sorts of observer effect style complications that can come about when an
obvious outsider from a western country starts interviewing someone about their
use of a western product like Facebook. 

These issues were summed up with three pieces of advice for ICT4D research:

1. As in some forms of anthropological research, immersion is important to
thoroughly understand the environment, which can lead to an intuition to provide
solutions.
2. Adapt new technologies, and iteratively develop prototypes to develop an
innovation in that environment to solve a particular problem.
3. Evaluate results, and develop a scientific proof that the innovation is
having an actual impact.

You can see Toyama talk about it in this short video:

<div class="text-center">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3IqTqhvObp8"
frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

As Toyama talks about in @Toyama:2013, he came to a realization that we may be
deluded in seeking technical answers to social problems. His idea of the 
[Law of Amplification], which is further developed in his recently published
book [Geek Heresy], is that technology can widen the gaps between the
haves and have nots, rather than bridging them.

In the second half of the class I lead a discussion about @Ahmed:2015. Somehow I
accidentally prepared for a discussion of @Jackson:2014b. This proved ot be
quite confusing, becuase both papers draw on the same set of interview content
acquired over several months of ethnographic research in Bangladesh. We were
actually able to have a fairly involved discussion for fifteen minutes before I
realized my mistake. I suspect this didn't reflect well on the questions I was
asking! 

At any rate there were a few takeaways from the discussion. 80 interviews sounds
like a lot. It sounded like many interviews may have been done as part of just
noting down experiences while working as an apprentice in some of the repair
shops. However it wasn't clear if these 70 interviews were with all different
people, or if some interview sessions occurred with the same individual more
than once. Typically interviews reach a saturation point much before 70, at
which point no new information is being learned. It was my impression that the
cost of sending someone to Bagladesh (in time and money) meant that collecting a
large amount of data was advantageous. But I don't remember that being spelled
out.

One big takeaway for me was it seemed like there were a lot of parallels between
the technologies deployed and made available to archives, and ICT4D
environments. Perhaps this isn't charitable, but the resources deployed to
archives is often threadbare, to the point that much needs to be done with
comparitively little. It seems like some of the techniques that are useful in 
ICT4D contexts could also be useful in many archives. Additionally the
ethnographic technique of immersion also could have real benefits for
understanding the way archives actually work in practice, compared to the theory
we see in the research literature. I have a hunch that Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing might be a good conference venue for 
me to spend some time exploring, at least in terms of proceedings, and maybe
some day to attend.

## References

[ICT4D]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_and_communication_technologies_for_development
[offline]: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/thies/thies-wikiconference.pdf
[Kentaro Toyama]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kentaro_Toyama
[Law of Amplification]: http://geekheresy.org/tag/law-of-amplification/
[Geek Heresy]: http://www.amazon.com/Geek-Heresy-Rescuing-Social-Technology/dp/1494564580
[Arunesh Mathur]: http://aruneshmathur.co.in/
