---
layout: post
title: Tweets
tags:
- twitter
- social media
- sts
---

Over the winter break I've been enjoying [The Culture of Connectivity] which
was recommended by [Nicholas Proferes] during a talk last fall at the UMD 
iSchool about his [doctoral research]. I might have more to say when I finish 
it, but the chapter that examines Twitter contained a nice description of a 
tweet that seemed particularly relevant as Twitter [considers] changing from 
140 to 10,000 characters.

> Both the quality and quantity of tweets have been vital elements in the 
> dispute of what constitutes Twitter's essence during the stage of interpretive
> flexibility. The "tweet" is arguably Twitter's most distinctive contribution
> to online culture; a sentence limited to 140 characters flagged by a hashtag
> has become a global format for online public commentary. This new cultural
> form has been adopted widely outside the platform proper, for instance in
> newspapers and on television. Its concise syntax and delimited length render
> the tweet virtually synomymous with a quote--a citation from a source for 
> which authentication resides with the platform, not the journalist. Aside from
> figuring in the news the tweet has emerged as a cultural form inspiring poets
> and literary authors. [@Dijk:2013, pp. 76-77]

This was my first encounter with the notion of [interpretive flexibility], a
relatively old idea (at least relative to social media) from [Science and
Technology Studies] that technological artifacts can often exist in time periods
that support multiple (and possibly conflicting) interpretations
[@Pinch:1984]. In some ways interpretive flexibility sounds like common sense,
but maybe not when you consider how easy it is to slip into thinking of
technologies as fit for a particular purpose, and scientific findings as facts.
I think it's kinda interesting to consider *use* or as a form interpretation
when it comes to software. Hacking as interpretation.

### References

[The Culture of Connectivity]: https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-culture-of-connectivity-9780199970780?cc=us&lang=en&
[doctoral research]: http://dc.uwm.edu/etd/909/
[considers]: http://recode.net/2016/01/05/twitter-considering-10000-character-limit-for-tweets/
[Nicholas Proferes]: https://twitter.com/moduloone
[interpretive flexibility]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_construction_of_technology#Interpretative_flexibility
[Science and Technology Studies]: 
