---
layout: post
title: Law on ANT
tags:
- reading
- practice
- sts
---

Here are some more notes from a reading that followed on from @Nicolini:2012: a
description of ANT by [John Law], who worked closely with [Latour] and [Callon]
to define it.

Law, J. (2009). *The New Blackwell Companion to Social Theory*, chapter Actor
Network Theory and Material Semiotics, pages 141–158. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.

---

Law is careful to state up front that ANT is not a theory, and is instead a set
of descriptive practices. It can be defined in the abstract, but it is best
understood by looking at how it works in practice. Perhaps this is where
Nicolini got the idea of the *toolkit* from, which eschews theory, and places
ANT firmly in a practitioner space:

> As a form, one of several, of material semiotics, it is best understood as a
> toolkit for telling interesting stories about, and interfering in, those
> relations. More profoundly, it is a sensibility to the messy practices of
> relationality and materiality of the world. (p. 141-142)

Law mentions that key to understanding ANT is the idea of translation, that was
first introduced by [Michel Serres] and used by Latour and Callon in their early
work on ANT. Translation is making two words equivalent, but since no two words
*are* equivalent translation is about betrayal or shifting and linking words. He
situates ANT as a scaled down, or empirical version of what Foucault calls
*discourses* or *epistemes*. Law compares translation to Deleuze's idea of
[nomadic philosophy], and draws a parallel between Delueze's [assemblage] or
*agencements* and ANT. Just as an aside it's interesting to think about how this
philosophical work involving networks was germinating in France in the 1970s and
1980s and then we see the Web itself being created in the late 1980s.

Here are some features of Actor Network Theory as originally conceived:

**Material Durability**: social arrangements delegated into non-bodily physical
form tend to hold their shape better than those that simply depend on
face-to-face interaction

**Strategic Durability**: actor network conception of strategy can be understood
more broadly to include teleologically ordered patterns of relations indifferent
to human intentions

**Discursive Durability**: discourses define conditions of possibility, making
some ways of ordering webs of relations easier and others difficult or
impossible

And then here are some features of what Law calls the New Material Semiotic a
more "polytheistic" version of ANT that he groups under the Deluezian heading
*Diaspora*. Interestingly he cites @Star:1999 as offering one of the earliest
critiques of ANT, from a feminist perspective.

**Performativity**: the social is not constructed, it is enacted or performed,
and its in these performances that they can be understood and studied.

**Multiplicity**: a given phenomenon can be understood as a confluence of
practices, that aren't different perspectives on the same phenomenon, but are
actually different practices that may be coordinated for some duration
@Mol:2002. *Aside: it's kind of interesting that Mol has been one of the points
of connection between my independent study on practice theory and my
ethnographic methods class this semester.*

**Fluidity**: the ability of objects and practices to mutate, change shape,
reconfigure and persist.

**Realities and Goods**: networks create multiple overlapping ethical realities

Much of this discussion is oriented around the work of [Haraway], [Mol], [Moser]
and [Verran]. He ends on this note:

> To describe the real is always an ethically charged act. But, and this is the
> crucial point, the two are only partially connected: goods and reals cannot be
> reduced to each other. An act of political will can never, by itself, overturn
> the endless and partially connected webs that enact the real. Deconstruction
> is not enough. Indeed, it is trivial [@Latour:2004]. The conclusion is
> inescapable: as we write we have a simultaneous responsibility both to the
> real and to the good. Such is the challenge faced by this diasporic material
> semiotics. To create and recreate ways of working in and on the real while
> simultaneously working well in and on the good.

### References

[Michel Serres]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Serres
[Verran]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helen_Verran
[Moser]: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ingunn_Moser
[Haraway]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donna_Haraway
[John Law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Law_(sociologist)
[Callon]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Callon
[Latour]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruno_Latour
[nomadic philosophy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhizome_(philosophy)
[Mol]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annemarie_Mol
[assemblage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assemblage_(philosophy)
