---
layout: post
title: Nicolini (4)
tags:
- practice
- reading
---


Chapter 4 focuses on the idea of practice as something that is tied to tradition
and community, which is something Nicolini sees Giddens and Bourdieu departing
from. Nicolini is presenting this chapter mostly in order to critique the idea,
because its focus on people transmitting ideas to each other, when left
unexamined, tends to give solidity to social actors and groups:

> I will argue that while a coherent theory of learning and transmission is 
> a requisite element of any theory of practice, there is a fine balance to 
> be struck between recognizing that all practices need to be recognized 
> by a group of practitioners, and the reification of such a collective 
> into a social body that exists independently of the practice. (p. 78)

Socialization (family and schooling) is important to the work of Durkheim, who
influenced Giddens. Apprenticeship is another concept that has been used to
explain how practices are transmitted--but it requires the master/pupil power
dynamic, and hence the acceptance of inequality of social positions. It is also
more limited in that it is focused primarily on learned skills of craftsmen or
artists.

[Legitimate Peripheral Participation] (LPP) is a term introduced by @Lave:1991
that attempts to take apprenticeship out of the particular historical
environments (the craftsman's shop) and explain apprenticeship as a learning
process. They do this by making it essential that the learner take
responsibility for the thing they are doing -- this is what makes it a practice.
Nicolini cites Foucault in pointing out that this acceptance of responsibility
also means an acceptance of the social order and power dynamics present in it.
It's interesting that the term *community of practice* was first introduced in
@Lave:1991 as well. Well, at least for me since I find myself using that phrase
quite a bit. The idea of apprenticeship is decentered, as not only happening
between master and apprentice, but includes advanced novices, other apprentices,
other master craftsmen, and the material artifacts used. So practice becomes
socially situated.

Apparently @Lave:1991 gave rise to many ethnographic studies of [situated
learning], that loked at learning as a social phenomena rather than something
that happens inside someone's head. Nicolini sees two drawbacks to LPP. The
first is similar to his criticism of Boudrieu's idea of habitus: it fails to
account for non-incremental change in a convincing way. And the second is that
it doesn't take into account the wider socio-historical context, and
specifically the role that power, ideology and domination play in practice. This
criticism can be found in @Contu:2000.

It is clear that Nicolini doesn't particularly like the term *community* since
he launches into a critique of its fuzziness, morality and the way that it is
used ideologically to define groups of people in order to obscure power,
conflict and differences. He references @Foucault:1966 by calling community a
*discursive formation* that controls what can and cannot be talked about. He
sees the use of the term *community* with *practice* as problematic, because one
obscures what the other is attempting to make clear. It might be interesting to
look closer at this criticism, especially since I have used the term *community
of practice* myself so often. Nicolini says that @Handley:2006 has a good review
of the debate.

With these criticisms in mind it does still seem like @Wenger:1998 has some
useful concepts for the study of practice in the idea of *situated learning*,
which involves:

* mutual engagement
* communal negotiation
* shared repertoire
* shared history
* boundaries [@Star:1989]

Nicolini makes a case for dropping the use of *community* and instead simply
talking about *practice*, because of the way *community* obscures processual,
social, temporary and conflictual properties. He seems to be saying that
communities do exist, but they are an effect of practices in operation. Making
communities the unit of analysis obscures the way that practices create
communities. But then he goes on to say that it's not practical to remove it
because it is such a useful term in management circles. More importantly it does
highlight the importance of *shared* practices, that things don't just happen in
our heads--they are social.

Nicolini cites @Barley:1997 to explain how the phrase "community of practice"
can in fact be a way for "semi-professions" to legitimate themselves--which is
kind of an interesting idea. In fact @Barley:1997 looks like it could be a very
useful example of an ethnographic study of technical work, that could possibly
be a useful model for my own examination of web archiving work. Here's the
summary [from Amazon]:

> Between Craft and Science brings together leading scholars from sociology,
> anthropology, industrial relations, management, and engineering to consider
> issues surrounding technical work, the most rapidly expanding sector of the
> labor force. Part craft and part science, part blue-collar and part
> white-collar, technical work demands skill and knowledge but is rarely
> rewarded with commensurate status or salary. The book first considers the 
> anomalous nature of technical work and the difficulty of locating it in 
> any conventional theoretical framework. Only an ethnographic approach, 
> studying the actual doing of the work, will make sense of the subject, 
> the authors conclude. The studies that follow report daily practice 
> filled with disjunctures and ironies that mirror the ambiguities of 
> technical work's place in the larger culture. On the basis of those 
> studies, the authors probe questions of policy, management, and education.
> Between Craft and Science considers the cultural difficulties in 
> understanding technical work and advances coherent, practice-oriented 
> insights into this anomalous phenomenon.

Now I'm kind of wondering if I need to adjust what I read next this semester...

### References

[situated learning]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Situated_learning
[from Amazon]: https://www.amazon.com/Between-Craft-Science-Collection-Technology/dp/0801483662
[Legitimate Peripheral Participation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legitimate_peripheral_participation
