---
layout: post
title: Nicolini (7)
tags:
- reading
- practice
---

Chapter 7 is largely about Theodore Schatzki's theory of practice. At its
simplest his idea of practice is comprised of  *tasks* and *projects*.  Tasks
are things like *opening a can* which could be part of a project like *cooking a
meal*. Assemblages of tasks and projects are *practices*. Actions can be linked
together by *rules*. All practices involve goals or ends that the participants
may or may not be fully aware of: a teleo-affective structure.  Discussion,
contestation and conflict around these goals are part of practice.  Practices
are continued through repeated performance and collective/social memory
[@Schatzki:2006]. 

The presence of objects in practices has a variety of interpretations. Notably
Latour makes the case for objects as participants in activity (or practices).
This is opposed to Schatzki who says that only humans carry out practices. Other
theorists such as @Barad:2007 take a position somewhere in the middle by arguing
that the position of objects with respect to humans is a function of the
discursive and material practices that are being examined. I'm noticing from my
bookmarks that I've run across [Karen Barad] before, perhaps because of her work
around STS and feminism. This might be an interesting pathway, I'm always drawn
to approaches that take a middle path through extremes. Nicolini offers his own
synthesis of these two viewpoints:

> When we examine the world in terms of a (multiplicity of) practice, we cannot
> avoid taking into consideration the central role of artefacts and the
> entanglement between human and non-human performativity. More than this, the
> practice approach warns us that the nature and identity of objects cannot be
> apprehended independently of the practice in which they are involved—just as 
> we cannot make sense of our practices without taking into account the 
> materials that enter it. Objects,materials, and technology need thus to be 
> studied "in practice" and with reference to the practices in which they are 
> involved. (p. 171)

He attributes the neologism *sociomateriality* to @Orlikowski:2010, which might
could be a good paper to follow up on for my work, since that idea figures so
prominently in the way I've been thinking about my interviews with web
archivists.

Practices unfold in contextual spaces where it they are situated with other
practices, which in turn provide understanding about what objects are for, how
they can be used, what actions can be performed with them, and what actions
follow those actions, etc.  Heidegger calls these spaces clearings; Foucault
calls them discursive spaces/positions; Schatzki calls them sites. Wittgenstein
used this idea of context when describing how people follow rules. Context
provides intelligibility.

Practices require a social dimension: they must be shared amongst a collective
of participants. Nicolini calls this *sociality* or a *horizon of
intelligibility*. These collectives have an ordering, or a particular
arrangement of people, artifacts, organisms: for example in workplaces like an
office or a factory. For Schatzki sites are the outcome and effect of practices
that entangled with material arrangements. This recursivity seems to directly
recall Giddens idea of structuration.

For Schatzki Social arrangements are made of three things: chains of actions,
orchestration of ends or projects, prefiguration actions (actions that determine
future actions). Nicolini adds a fourth: material arrangements.  It's not clear
here exactly what Nicolini is doing here. From the way this chapter is put
together in the sequence of the book he appears to be aligning his own
theoretical viewpoint very closely to Schatzki, but also seems to be modifying
or amending/appending to Schatzki's ideas of what constitutes practice. He also
seems to cite [Joseph Rouse] quite a bit for interpretation of Schatzki.

Putting Schatzki's ideas to work in studying organizations involves participant
observation to:

* identify actions
* identify practice-arrangement bundles (that enclose those actions)
* identify other nets of practices that are tied to those bundles

Funnily enough Nicolini goes on to say that part of the problem with Schatzki is
that it is difficult to apply his theory in an empirical way. Researchers don't
really have an idea of what to go out looking for during participant observation
when using Schatzki. He contrasts this situation with Latour's idea of ANT which
isn't so much a theory as it is a way of working: follow the actors.

### Reference

[Karen Barad]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_Barad
[Joseph Rouse]: http://jrouse.blogs.wesleyan.edu/
