---
layout: post
title: Nicolini (3)
tags:
- practice
- reading
---


Chapter 3 takes a look at the work of two twentieth century thinkers who are
critical in understanding the turn to practice: [Anthony Giddens] and [Pierre Bourdieu].

### Giddens

Giddens is reportedly one of the most influential sociologists of the 20th
century.  His idea of structuration draws on the work of [Marx], [Weber] and
[Durkheim].  Originally I was going to focus specifically on structuration in my
independent study, but I decided against it because of the breadth of Giddens'
influence, and the idea that it might be more useful to focus on the practice
theory angle, which conceptually ties together Giddens work with the work of
other folks in the field of IS and ITC. Also, I'll admit, once I discovered he
served as an advisor to Tony Blair my interest waned a little bit.

Giddens uses the idea of structuration to resolve dualist tensions in social
theory related to subjectivity and objectivity. Structuration is a [recursive]
model of society defined by practices that are composed of actors, rules and
resources.

* **actors**: the producers of activity, who draw on rules and resoures
* **rules**: generalized procedures for action, not to be confused with 
  instructions or prohibitions (Wittgenstein)
* **resources**: the ways in which power, or the ability to mobilize people, is
  manifested (Marx)

Nicolini uses language as an example. Spoken language and the rules of language
mutually constitute themselves. Spoken language is based on rules of language,
but the rules of language would not exist if they were not enacted and
reinvented in spoken language. So there's the recursion.

Actors are required to be knowledgeable and reflexive in structuration theory.
However their knowledge and abilities are finite which is how change and
mutation can get in. Giddens also emphasizes that activity is always situated in
time and place, which shows his connection to Marx's historical materialism.
And finally practices are related to each other--they form interdependencies and
accrete which manifests as structures and systems. Sometimes practices may
result in structures that contravene each other which can result in reorderings
and revolutions in practice.

Another interesting concept Giddens introduces is practical and discursive
conciousness. Where practical consciousness is "saturated with taken for
grantedness" and has a lot of parallels to the idea of tacit knowledge that we
saw earlier in Heidegger's idea of [ready-to-hand].

Could Giddens' rules be comparable to algorithms? Who follows the rules in
either case? Could people using technologies that embody alogorthmic rules be
thought of as following the rules? Or does the level of indirection break that.
When the algorithms break, they become visible, kind of like infrastructure. I
wonder if the controversy involving adaptive structuration theory
[@DeSanctis:1994] is centered around whether the rules can be written down I
also wonder if focusing on the site of practice provides a way out of some of
this controversy about the prescriptive application of structuration theory?

According to Nicolini uptake of Giddens was low, because of rise of
postmodernism at the same time, which eschewed the theory building that Giddens
was doing.  They were also tired of the conservative implications of his system.
(p. 50). His work was also highly theoretical, and difficult to put into
practice. He actively dissuaded people from using his concepts in their own
research!  It was to be used as sensitizing principles. It sounds like I could
read @Giddens:1991 for more abou this. Giddens resisted the idea that material
artifacts could be structural resources.  This seems rather odd, and perhaps at
odds with [ANT]. @Orlikowski:1992 introduced the use of structuration theory
into organizational studies and ICT. But in @Orlikowski:2000 she moved away from
it, towards practice theory. These might be useful transition to focus on later
in the semester.

> Giddens appeared too busy developing a theory of society and individuals 
> which put everything in the right place, portrayed people as reflexive and 
> rational, and allowed almost no room for pathos, emotions, disorder, 
> conflict, and violence. Moreover,Giddens' structurationism failed to inspire 
> a community that had been held to ransom for decades by the boxes, arrows, 
> and loops of system theory. In spite of its innovative, strong, processual 
> character, Giddens' system theory looked suspiciously like more of the 
> same.  Finally, critical authors were some-what unhappy with Giddens' flat 
> and a-conflictual view of the social, and were weary of the potentially 
> deeply conservative implications of structurationism.

### Bourdieu

According to Nicolini, Bourdieu's core point is that representing practice, or
*praxeology* as he called it, is not enough (anthropology)--practice needs to be
explained (sociology). I interpret this as saying that descriptions of practice
must reflect on they ways in which description is being performed: what is being
made visible, and what is being made invisible. These are important things for
Bourdieu. I find this explanation much more compelling than the strong/weak
distinction that Nicolini makes in the introduction.

*Habitus* is a key concept or theme throughout all of Bourdieu's work. It helps
get around the problems of objectivism and subjectivisme.  I feel like
uunderstanding objectivism as Nicolini describes it, would involve more reading,
especially Levi-Strauss and the Structuralists.  Habitus isn't a way of
understanding the world -- it's more a way of being in the world. Habitus
relates to the body, in ways that are similar to [Merleau-Ponty]'s ideas of
schema and habit as well as [Polanyi]'s idea of personal tacit knowledge.
Schema and habit in particular really remind me a bit of Dewey's ideas about
norms.  Schema is compared to the feeling of driving a car where the car is an
extension of the body's corporeal schema. It's only where that meshing breaks
down that the schema is noticed. Again breakdown plays an important role. It
seems like this meshing is the content domain of HCI.

[Tacit knowledge] was used by Polyani to explain how scientists work. Explicit
knowledge is traditional scientific knowledge exemplified by the scientific
method. But tacit knowledge is an awareness of knowing how to do something that
defies analytical description. "We know much more than we know we know." 

Bourdieu summarizes his idea of practice using the following formula that is
desribed in @Bourdieu:1984, p. 101.

    (habitus * capital) + field = practice

Capital is anything rare and worthy of being sought after. It can be material
and symbolic. Symbolic capitol in particular *sustains* domination, because it
includes the power to name, and renders the entire process invisible. Fields are
domains or structured spaces in which the distribution of capital is disputed.

Habitus is a group phenomenon. 

@Lau:2004 is cited quite a bit for distinguishing and criticizing these ideas --
which might be useful to read.

Ways of studying practice (or rather, what not to do):

* need to participate in "daily endeavors". You need to live, not represent. You
  also need to dismantle or side step the power relation of the Academy over the
  practitioner

* Simply providing a description of practice is not enough. You need to describe
  how the practices are propagated and work together. 

Reflexivity if important to Bourdieu -- since he saw how his own work was itself
problematic in the way that it theorized capital in metaphysical terms. Michel
De Certau criticizes Bourdieu's split theoretical personality, and points to
levels of pratices: dominant ones that are organized by institutions and many
minor ones that operate as micro-tactices of resistance, local deformations, and
reinvention. I almost put @DeCerteau:2011 on the reading list for this semester
after reading about him in an [essay] by Alan Liu. It's just a matter of time
since de Certeau's approach, much like Latour, seems to be a great bridging work
between the humanities and social sciences, which is kinda where I live.

Nicolini sees Bourdieu's idea of habitus as not accounting for practices, and
suggests that perhaps the very idea of trying to theorize practices is at the
heart of the problem. The solution *is* the problem. Habitus is self
contradictory: it says that practices are historically and socially contingent,
but operates at a theoretical level that are outside place and time. Bourdieu
fails to account for change (only reproduction), mediation (technology), and
reflexivity as *part* of practice.

So, I'm left feeling Bourdieu has some quite subtle theoretical ideas, almost
too subtle  -- but from this brief introduction I feel much more aligned with
his politics than with Giddens. Bourdieu's attention to everyday life is
attractive:

> Bourdieu directs our attention to the fact that *practice* is the locus of 
> the social reproduction of everyday life and symbolic orders, of 
> the taken-for-grantedness of the experienced world and the power structure 
> that such a condition both carries and conceals. (p. 69)

### References

[Marx]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Marx
[Weber]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Weber
[Durkheim]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89mile_Durkheim
[Pierre Bourdieu]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Bourdieu
[Anthony Giddens]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Giddens
[recursive]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursion
[ready-to-hand]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heideggerian_terminology#Ready-to-hand
[essay]: http://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity/
[Merleau-Ponty]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maurice_Merleau-Ponty
[Polanyi]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Polanyi
[Tacit knowledge]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tacit_knowledge
[ANT]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor%E2%80%93network_theory
