---
layout: post
title: Practice
---

A few weeks ago [Cliff Lampe] visited UMD to give [a talk] about his work on
[citizen interaction design], connecting the University of Michigan iSchool with
the City of Jackson, Michigan and other cities around Michigan. At a high level
the goal of the project is to get iSchool students out in the field working with
local governments to try to collaborate on solutions to problems that they have.

Lampe stressed that much of the work was in determining what problems 
could be effectively worked on in a semester, and jointly arriving 
at *sustainable* solutions. The sustainable part is hard, especially when the
students are here one year and gone the next--leaving websites, databases and 
other artifacts behind that need attention, care and repair. A focus on the 
actual dimensions of the problem and not the technical solution is key, as is
sustained support from the University and the city. I seem to remember he also
highlighted the need for simple solutions: e.g. a Google spreadsheet, rather
than a full blown Web application with a database. You can see a list of some 
of these projects [here].

One thing Lampe really impressed on me was the importance of a *practice
orientation* to this and other information studies work.  He has been very 
active in the HCI community for a number of years, and feels like there has 
been a trend towards a broadened study of the processes and contexts
that information systems are a part of (Practice paradigm). He said he was 
working on a paper to discuss this trend in HCI, but then found that Kuutti 
and Bannon had already written one [@Kuutti:2014].

I'm still in the process of digesting the paper, but thought I'd just jot down 
some quotes that struck me as I was reading. 

> For the Interaction paradigm, the scope of the intervention is viewed
> as changing human actions by means of novel technology. For the
> Practice paradigm, a whole practice is the unit of intervention, not 
> only technology, but everything related and interwoven in the performance
> is under scrutiny and potentially changeable, depending on the goals of
> the intervention. Thus the changing technology is but one of the options.

Only focusing on technology and immediate interactions isn't enough. It's
important to decenter the technology by placing it in the larger cultural 
and social context. Of course that perspective can be difficult to maintain
without getting completely abstracted and lost. Zooming in on actual 
practices seems like a useful way to avoid doing that. It feels like there 
might be connections to Latour's work on [Actor-Network Theory] and 
[Object-Oriented Ontology] here too, to aid in this kind of study of
practices--particularly regarding the interest in artifacts.

> Practice theories do not locate the origin of the social in the mind,
> discourse, or interaction, but in 'practices' - routines consisting of a
> number of interconnected and inseparable elements: physical and mental
> activities of human bodies, the material environment, artifacts and their use,
> contexts, human capabilities, affinities and motivation.  *Practices are
> wholes*, whose existence is dependent on the temporal interconnection of all
> these elements, and cannot be reduced to, or explained by, any one single
> element.

I like this idea of practices as wholes, since too often we focus on one small
part of the practice and miss the larger picture. This larger picture where
technology is just part involves the values and outcomes of particular 
practices. What do we want to happen in the world?

> From a practices perspective the world is a network of performances that are
> durable, because the ways of doing things are coded in minds, bodies,
> artifacts, objects and texts, and connected together so that the result of
> performing one activity serves as a resource for another.

Kuutti and Bannon remind me a bit of work we've been doing in MITH on our
[Digital Incubator] series, where we are focused on process rather tool 
building. Many digital humanities projects are oriented around tools or a
particular set of content, but often what can be really rewarding is 
teaching a process or practice that involves tools and content. It's a
craft thing I guess. 

Anyhow as a student I really like these kinds of papers because they serve as 
guide posts and provide lots of useful pointers out into the literature. The 
paper builds on [Davide Nicolini]'s [Practice Theory, Work, and Organization] 
which looks like a good introduction to this area.

## References

[Cliff Lampe]: https://www.si.umich.edu/people/clifford-lampe
[citizen interaction design]: https://www.si.umich.edu/academics/project-i-citizen-interaction-design
[here]: https://seelio.com/g/umsicid
[a talk]: http://hcil.umd.edu/events/event/bbl-clifford-lampe/
[Practice Theory, Work, and Organization]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Practice_theory
[Digital Incubator]: http://mith.umd.edu/research/digital-humanities-incubator-2014-15-researching-ferguson/
[Actor-Network Theory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor%E2%80%93network_theory
[Object-Oriented Ontology]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_ontology
[Davide Nicolini]: http://www.wbs.ac.uk/about/person/davide-nicolini/
