---
layout: post
title: Nicolini (9)
tags:
- practice
- reading
---

In the final chapter of *Practice theory, work, and organization* Nicolini
concludes by presenting his own approach to practice theory, which he calls a
*toolkit* approach:

>  I am not interested in proposing a new theory of practice. Instead, I will
>  embrace a different strategy that can be described as a form of programmatic
>  eclecticism or, more simply, a toolkit approach. My main tenet is that to
>  study practice empirically we are better served by a strategy based on
>  deliberately switching between theoretical sensitivities. (p. 213)

> In short, the toolkit approach that I advocate here responds to the principle
> that the aim of social science is to provide a richer and more nuanced
> understanding of the world, and not to offer simplified answers to complex
> questions. More clearly, good social science makes the world more complex, not
> simpler. Thicker, not thinner, descriptions are the aim of good social
> science.  And so it should be in the attempt to understand practices. (p. 215)

This toolkit approach is less about applying existing theories to new
phenomenon, and more about increasing articulation, or useful knowledge about
the world [@Stengers:1997]. He also invokes @Barad:2003 and pragmatists to say
that theories are actually attempts to reconfigure the world in useful and
productive ways. These attempts at *doing things* in the world sometimes work
but often the world *bites back* in useful and interesting ways. Theories and
methods are conceived of as *packages*. Strangely this is  a topic that has come
up in my Ethnography class this semester where the professor has stressed how
deeply interrelated theory and methodology is. 

This package of theory and method is needed for:

* describing the world in terms of practices (not systems, actors, classes)
* textual representation: being able to capture, communicate and experiment
* establish infra-language for generating new stories and theories

He uses the metaphor of zooming in on practices in a particular place and time
and then zooming out to where practices can be compared with other practices.
These are alternated and repeated, as different theoretical lenses.
Ethno-methodology is an example of zoomed in attention: micro-ethnography,
organizational ethnography, Shadowing, conversational analysis, attention to
sequence all are useful. But if analysis is limited to these techniques the view
can become locked in and extremely formalized.

Another technique of zooming in focuses attention on the body: how are practices
achieved with and through the body. Also of interest is how the body itself is
shaped by practice. It can also be useful to focus on artifacts in relation to
the body -- the materiality of practice.

Also of interest are auto-poesis or creativity -- the application of practices
to particular times and places to suit the contingencies of circumstance. Noting
how practices are adapted and made unique can help identify them. In addition
the practices are characterized by their durability or persistence over time.
What are the mechanics of persistence that allow practices to perpetuate?

The *zooming out* process is mostly a process of taking an identified practice
and situating it with other practices. 

> In a sense, then, all practices are involved in a variety of relationships and
> associations that extend in both space and time, and form a gigantic,
> intricate,and evolving texture of dependencies and references. Paraphrasing
> [@Latour:2005, p. 44; see also @Schatzki:2002], we can state that practice is
> always a node, a knot, and a conglomerate of many types of material and human
> agencies that have to be patiently untangled.

The metaphor of the *knot* is one that's come up a few times in Nicolini's book
... and I ran across it recently in @Jackson:2014c. I notice from my notes and
citations I've accumulated during my reading that the first the knot also
appears in Engestrom:1999. I don't know if it's just the presentation by
Nicolini, but Engestrom seems to keep popping up in interesting ways -- so I'd
like to follow up my reading of practice theory by digging into some of his
work. Another word that gets used a lot when describing the process of zooming
out to look at relationships between practices is *assemblage*, which isn't
really referenced at all but seems to be drawn from Deleuze:1998. Just glancing
at the Wikipedia page about [Assemblage] I can see that *constellation* is also
used in assemblage theory. Somewhere along the line I picked this word up as
well, but I don't remember where. I think I've looked at @Deleuze:1988 before
and been intimidated. It might be interesting to read some of the
theory/crticism around Deleuze at some point.

Nicolini offers up a few things to focus on to achieve this effect of zooming
out from individual practices:

* compare here/now of a practice with the there/then of another
* how do practices "conjure" or establish social arrangements?
* what are the interests/projects/hopes that led to the current state of
  affairs?

He also suggests that [shadowing], the [sociology of translation] and [Actor
Network Theory] are useful ways of zooming out the theoretical perspective
[@Latour:2005; @Law:2009; @Czarniawska:2007]. ANT's idea of *following the
actors* can be a useful technique for discovering connections between practices.
The actors can be people, artifacts and inscriptions. The sociology of
translation (an idea from ANT) can help examine how relations/associations are
kept in place [@Callon:1984]. I think I've read this piece by Callon before, at
least it's in my BibDesk database already, but I should move this up in the
queue to read. I read Reassembling the Social [a few years ago], probably before
I had enough context to understand it. Czarniawska is new to me, so that might
also merit some reading up on.

Again the word "knotted" is used to describe how things are connected together:

> The idea of translation invites us to appreciate that associations need to be
> "knotted" and kept actively in place through the coordination of humans and
> non-human mediators such as forms, software, policy documents, plans,
> contracts, and spaces. Only when all these resources are aligned to form
> chains of translation in such a way that the results of an activity are
> stabilized and turned into a more or less solid black box, can effecting the
> activity of another practice be accomplished. (p. 231-232)

Nicolini points out that ANT and translation don't really explain why things get
knotted together other than somewhat bleak implications of power. Practices on
the other hand provide a pro-social, teleo-affective (Schatzki) grounding to
work from--where goals matter, and aren't reduced to notions of Power.

The second class of techniques for zooming out are what Nicolini calls *practice
networks* or *action nets* [@Czarniawska:2004]. The idea here is to to ask where
are the effects of the practice under consideration being felt. How are the
results of the practice used in other contexts? 

I'm actually really glad that the book closes by connecting the dots between
practice theories and Latour, since this is something that had been at the back
of my mind while I was working through the chapters. Latour seemed to be
conspicuously missing in the review of the literature of practice, but Nicolini
was actually saving him for the conclusion. I also like the formulation that
practice provides an almost ethical dimension to ANT that isn't simply
political--not that politics are ever really simple.  It's just the level of
focus isn't at the macro level necessarily, but in the hands of people achieving
things in their local environments, for their comfort and survival perhaps--not
for domination.

Nicolini also brings back the idea of Cultural and Historical Activity Theory
to stress the idea of analyzing *how did we get here*. Historical analysis is
key to understanding power relations in the current state of affairs and how
they are inscribed in practice. Zooming out on the temporal dimension provides
this historical view.

The process of zooming in and zooming out can be repeated, but it also can be
achieved by having multiple research projects open at the same time. Each
project provides a zoomed in perspective on a particular phenomenon, but the
connections between projects offer an opportunity to reflect from a zoomed out
perspective. This idea appeals to my own habit of keeping multiple plates
spinning at once. I suspect many people work this way. He offers the [rhizome]
as a metaphor or talisman of this sort of work--rather than a linear process.
Nicolini does say that the idea of zooming in and out suggests that the world is
organized into micro, meso and macro levels -- which is something he does not
want to suggest. Instead he thinks it's more a question of refocusing on
specific circumstances, and then relations between those sites: moving around
above practices and then hovering above particular practices.

The book concludes by saying that none of the chapters are meant to be formulas
but just suggestions for ways of working to be tried. 

> So my last words are: give it a go and enjoy responsibly!

I feel like lots, and lots of rhizomatic exploration await from this very useful
book. Thanks Nicolini 😀 The only problem is that I think I may need to adjust
my reading for my independent study based on what I've learned. But that's what
independent studies are for right?

### References

[Actor Network Theory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor%E2%80%93network_theory
[a few years ago]: http://inkdroid.org/2013/05/02/everything-is-data/
[shadowing]: http://designresearchtechniques.com/casestudies/shadowing/
[assemblage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assemblage_(philosophy)
[rhizome]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhizome_(philosophy) 
[sociology of translation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Translation_(sociology)
