---
layout: post
title: Practice Theory
tags:
- practice
- umd
---


This semester I'm going to be doing an independent study with Professor [Andrea
Wiggins] to research and apply [Practice Theory] in my own work. I've included
part of my research proposal (which is still a bit in flux at the moment) below.
The plan is to use this web space to write up notes about my reading and work as
I go. I thought I'd share it in case it shows up in your feed reader--hey I'm
told people still use them. Writing here also puts a little bit of pressure on
myself to stick to the plan as best I can. I'll tag all the posts with
[practice].

---

## Overview

The purpose of this independent study is for me to perform a detailed analysis
of interview transcripts obtained during a previous study of appraisal practices
among web archivists. The goal is to use *practice theory* as a critical lens
for coding the transcripts. Weekly readings will introduce the field of practice
theory. Each week I will write up brief summaries of the readings on my blog.
The data analysis will be packaged up and results will be written up as a paper
that could serve as an initial draft submission for a conference or a journal.

## Description

For the past year I have been researching how Web archivists go about doing
their work to better understand existing and potential designs for Web archiving
technology. Specifically, I've been interested in how archivists decide what to
collect from the Web, and how they perform these actions using automated agents
(software). The goal in this work is to help inform the design of archival
systems for collecting and preserving Web content.

While the archivist's work is sometimes guided by institutional collection
development policies, not all organizations have them; and even when they do,
considerable interpretive work often needs to be done when putting these
policies into practice. The situation is further complicated by the fact that
the tools that are available to the archivist in their Web archiving work, and
the material of the Web itself are changing rapidly. This churn makes it very
difficult to add specific detail to collection development policies without it
becoming quickly out of date. By necessity they must remain at a fairly high
level, which leaves the archivist with quite a bit of room for experimentation
and practice. The *practice* of Web archiving is relatively young, compared with
the longer established archival science. As a result there remain large
questions about how the materiality of the Web, and tools for working with it
impacts archival science at a theoretical and practical level.

Existing survey work done by the International Internet Preservation Consortium
[@Marill:2004] and the National Digital Stewardship Alliance [@NDSA:2012 ;
@Bailey:2013] described high level characteristics of Web archives work,
particularly at the level of national libraries and universities. However these
surveys intentionally did not provide a very rich picture of the day to day work
of Web archivists. In order to better understand how these appraisal decisions
are being enacted in Web archives I decided to conduct a series of unstructured
interviews with active Web archivists to see what common themes and interaction
patterns emerged from descriptions of their work.  I employed a grounded theory
research methodology which allowed me explore theoretical perspectives that
emerged during iterative data collection and analysis. Through coding of my
field notes I was able to observe a set of high level themes, which I reported
on in [a paper] I will be presenting at CSCW 2017.

One overarching theme that emerged in this work was the ways in which the
archivists and their software agents both worked together to produce the Web
archive. I became increasingly interested in ways of viewing this interaction,
which led me to reflect on the use of sociotechnical theory as a possible lens
for further analysis of the interviews. After some consultation with Professor
Wiggins I decided to spend some time exploring the sociotechnical theory
literature in order to build a list of readings and a work plan for taking
another look at my interview data using a sociotechnical theoretical lens, and
more detailed coding of the actual interview transcripts.

I found an excellent overview from @Sawyer:2014 about the application of
sociotechnical theory in Information Systems. This led to the realization that
sociotechnical theory, while seemingly narrow, was in fact a large intellectual
space that had many different branches and connections into IS and ICT. In fact
it felt like such a broad area that I wouldn't have time to thoroughly review
the literature while also doing data analysis and writing.

In order to further refine my focus I decided to read @Geiger:2015 and
@Ford:2015 which are two recent dissertations that have looked at Wikipedia as a
sociotechnical system. I was drawn to their work because of the parallels
between studying a collaboratively built encyclopedia and the study of archives
of Web content.  Both Geiger and Ford examine a medium or artifact that predates
the Internet, the encyclopedia, but which has subsequently been transformed by
the emergence of the Web as a sociotechnical artifact. Their ethnographic
approach led them to the use of participant observation as a method, which
aligned nicely with the first phase of my study.  While there were certainly
theoretical angles (the study of algorithms) that I can draw on, increasingly I
found that it was their focus on participation that I found compelling for my
own work.

Last spring [Cliff Lampe] [visited] UMD to give a talk about citizen interaction
design. While describing his work Lampe stressed what he saw as a turn toward
practice in the HCI community. He recommended a series of resources for further
exploration of the subject including @Kuutti:2014. Since I had been having some
difficulty in focusing my exploration of sociotechnical theory, and Ford and
Geiger seemed to also point towards the importance of *practice* in their
ethnographic work I decided to focus my independent study on three texts that
came up many times in the literature I reviewed. I wanted to read books instead
of articles because it seemed like a broad area and deep area that would benefit
from a few deep dives rather than a survey approach to the literature.


## Reading

**Nicolini, D. (2012). Practice theory, work, and organization: An introduction.
Oxford University Press.**

This text was recommended by @Kuutti:2014 for providing an overview of the field
of practice theory, and its theoretical and philosophical foundations in
phenomenology, ethnomethodlogy and activity theory. I'm hopeful that this text
will provide a useful and current picture of the field, which can be useful in
diving off into other readings later in the semester.

**Dourish, P. (2004). Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied
Interaction. MIT Press.**

Dourish is a heavily cited figure in HCI and sociotechnical literature. *Where
the Action Is* in particular helped establish the theoretical foundations for
incorporating social practices into system design. I'm particularly interested
in how Dourish grounds HCI in the philosophical work of Heidegger and
Wittgenstein. I guess it could be arguable about whether Dourish belongs in the
practice theory camp. I guess I'll know more after reading this book. I really
wanted to make sure I connected the dots between practice theory and information
technology.

**Suchman, L. (1986). Plans and situated actions. Cambridge University Press.**

This book by Suchman is constantly referenced in HCI literature as helping to
establish a theoretical focus on the social and material properties of computer
systems. As an anthropologist her use of ethnographic analysis is particular
interest to me. I wanted to read it first hand instead of just citing it as a
touchstone.

## Schedule

I've left some breathing room in the reading schedule near the end of the
semester to allow for additional reading encountered during the reading of the
main texts, and also for addition ideas from Professor Wiggins. I also wanted to
leave time for coding, analysis and writing since the goal of this independent
study is a paper.

**Week 1**

Nicolini, chapters 1-3

**Week 2**

Nicolini, chapters 4-5

**Week 3** 

Nicolini, chapter 6-7

**Week 4**

Nicolini, chapters 8-9

**Week 5**

Dourish, chapters 1-2

Coding

**Week 6**

Dourish, chapters 3-4

Coding

**Week 7**

Dourish, chapters 5-7

Coding

**Week 8**

Suchman, chapters 1-4

Coding

**Week 9**

Suchman, chapters 5-8

Paper Outline

**Week 10**

Data Analysis

**Week 11**

Data Analysis

Writing

**Week 12**

Writing

**Week 13**

Writing

**Week 14**

Writing

**Week 15**

Final paper due.

## References

[Practice Theory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Practice_theory
[Andrea Wiggins]: http://andreawiggins.com/
[Cliff Lampe]: https://www.si.umich.edu/people/clifford-lampe
[visited]: http://inkdroid.org/2016/03/04/practice/
[practice]: http://inkdroid.org/tag/practice/
[a paper]: http://inkdroid.org/papers/bots-seeds-people.pdf
