---
layout: post
title: "Appriasal in Web Archives: A Schema"
tags:
- practice
---

So as you can tell if you've been following along with my reading of Nicolini's
*Practice theory, work, and organization* I've been trying to survey the field
that is *practice theory*. The goal however isn't just to increase my knowledge,
but to apply it, and hopefully learn if it can be useful for my PhD work and
beyond.

As I described in my [proposal] for the independent study, I'm interested to see
if practice theory offers a useful conceptual lens for studying the ways in
which archivists do appraisal on the Web. Earlier this year I interviewed 30
archivists about their appraisal work in web archives. I recorded the interviews
but never had time to transcribe them all. I did use my interview notes and
summaries as data for a paper, [Bots, Seed and People] that I will be presenting
with my co-author (and adivsor) [Ricky Punzalan] at the next [CSCW]. Fortunately
Ricky had some extra money to get the interviews transcribed which sets the
stage for my study this semester.

My goal is to take another pass through the interviews using what I learned from
my previous analysis and also some ideas from practice theory. [Andrea Wiggins]
(who is kind enough to be guiding me through this independent study) advised me
to write down initial ideas about the schema because it is likely to change as
the schema is tested, and it can be difficult to remember why initial decisions
were made.  Being able to contrast what was learned through coding, with what
was expected/assumed at the beginning can provide valuable insights.

So here are the high level themes, and some of the parts that emerged in my 
previous analysis of appraisal in web archives:

* Crawl Modalities (Process)
  * domain
  * website
  * individual document
* Information Structures
  * directories
  * social networks (social filtering)
  * streams / feeds
  * url patterns
* Time/Money (Resources)
  * grants
  * testing
  * storage (sampling / fidelity)
  * quotas
  * vendors
* People/Roles
  * volunteers
  * technicians
  * archivists
  * software developers
* organizational groups
  * (actual) social networks
  * partnerships
  * competitions
  * environmental scanning
* Tools
  * seed lists
  * crawlers
  * indexers
  * viewers
  * nomination tools
  * spreadsheets
  * email
  * social bookmarking
* Breakdown
  * storage
  * dynamic web content
  * staffing
  * timeliness
  * coordination
* design components
  * explicit 
  * implicit 

To these I think I will add some ideas from practice theory. I will start out by
trying to code for them, but it may be that they are concepts that help me
interpret the data later instead. It would be useful to be able to coordinate
these concepts with the ones I uncovered in the previous study to see if
practice theory is useful here.

* goals (purpose of practices)
* effects (who/what is effected by practices)
* history (how did we get here)
* training/mentorship
* artifacts/objects (not just tools)
* work (specific actions & activities)
* products (work outcomes)
* professions/communities (groups of practitioners)
* rules (norms, behaviors)
* time
* space

I think Nicolini's metaphor of zooming in and zooming out could also provide a
useful method for me as I take another look at my interviews. He recommends
cycling between close attention to practices and then zooming out to identify
relationships between practices. As I examine appraisal in web archives as a 
practice I think it will be useful to consider it in relation to other
practices--perhaps appraisal in other domains. Also I suspect that appraisal
itself will contain multiple practices within it.

The attention to breakdown as
a cross-cutting concern could also be really useful in helping make some of
these practices visible. Breakdown itself figures directly into practice theory,
because of the connection to Heidegger. So maybe it is conceptual glue for 
connecting my previous sand is a conceptual 

My goal for the next two weeks is to try out these codes on 2 or 3
transcripts and see how well they work. Given the results of that test I'll
adjust the schema as needed and then take a full pass through.

I'm going to be deviating from my original reading list to follow up on a few
leads from my reading of @Nicoloni:2012:

Kuutti, K. (1996). Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer
interaction research. Context and consciousness: Activity theory and
human-computer interaction, pages 17–44.

Engestr ̈om, Y., Engestr ̈om, R., and V ̈ah ̈aaho, T. (1999). Activity Theory and
Social Practice: Cultural- Historical Approaches., chapter When the center does
not hold: The importance of knotworking. Aarhus University Press Aarhus,
Denmark.

Miettinen, R. and Virkkunen, J. (2005). Epistemic objects, artefacts and
organizational change. Organization, 12(3):437–456.

Miettinen, R. (2006). Epistemology of transformative material activity: John
Dewey’s pragmatism and cultural-historical activity theory. Journal for the
Theory of Social Behaviour, 36(4):389–408.

A few things more related things that came up during my meeting this week:

* thinking about effects of distributed/virtual organizations [@Winter:2014] and units/layers of organizational analysis [@Scott:2015]
* infrastructural inversion: a name for the technique of looking at breakdowns
  for insight into infrastructure
* [critical incident technique] as a research method
* [Stigmergy] - social filtering as appraisal technique?
* pay attention to things vs qualities (nouns vs adverbs) when coding

### References

[practice]: http://inkdroid.org/tag/practice/
[proposal]: http://inkdroid.org/2016/09/09/practice-theory/
[Ricky Punzalan]: http://rpunzalan.com/
[CSCW]: https://cscw.acm.org/2017/
[Andrea Wiggins]: http://andreawiggins.com/
[Bots, Seeds and People]: http://inkdroid.org/papers/bots-seeds-people.pdf
[critical incident technique]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_Incident_Technique
[Stigmergy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stigmergy
