---
layout: post
title: Nicolini (2)
tags: 
- practice
- reading
---

Chapter 2 of @Nicolini:2012 provides a quick tour through a few thousand years
of philosophy to highlight the deep roots of practice theory.

When describing the types of activity of the human mind Aristotle added to
Plato's *episteme* (scientific knowledge) two more categories: *phronesis*
(practical wisdom) and *techne* (art or skill). Phronesis in particular was a
non-inferential, non-deductive and highly improvisational form of knowledge.
Nicolini draws on the work of @Nussbaum:1986 in his reading of Aristotle. He
reminds us that Greek society at the time was highly segmented by slavery, and
that it was a luxury of the ruling class to be able to dedicate one's life to
learning (episteme). Those that mastered practice, the artisans, were second
class citizens at best. So there was a hierarchy to episteme, phronesis and
techne.

In the centuries following Aristotle this aspect to his work was all but lost
until Marx and Nietzsche rediscovered it, and turned the hierarchy on its head,
with practice becoming the fundamental principle. Marx's focus on human
activity, can be found in his discussion of *praxis* which eventually becomes
*production* in his later writing. Production is a word that he used to cover
all human material practices. Marx's philosophy hinged on the importance of
putting ideas into practice in the world, as Nicolini says:

> [Marx] makes clear the aim of science is not that of producing theoretical 
> knowledge but more of obtaining practical mastery of the world in order to 
> satisfy the practical needs of mankind.

I can't help but be reminded of the American Pragmatism here too (Pierce, James
and Dewey) and was a bit surprised that Nicolini doesn't mention them at all.
Shrug. At any rate, it's clear that Nicolini sees Marx as opening up a new space
for thought, a space that Nietzsche and Heidegger would later fill. Quite a bit
of the chapter is also devoted to Heidgegger's idea of *Dasein* or being in the
world, which quite a few later practice theorists draw on.  Heidegger positions
everyday practices prior to representation -- echoing Marx's inversion of
knowledge and practice. Heidegger introduces the idea of *breakdown*, which
makes everyday practices visible. Breakdown is an idea that gets used a great
deal in infrastructure studies. To understand it Nicolini borrows Heidegger's
thought experiment of hammering a nail:

> The hammer belongs to the environment and can be unthinkingly used by the
> carpenter. The carpenter does not need to 'think a hammer' in order to drive 
> in a nail. His or her capacity to act depends upon the familiarity with the 
> act of hammering. His/her use of the practical item‘hammer’is its 
> significance to him/her in the setting 'hammering' and 'carpentry' ... The
> hammer as such acquires a separate 'existence' only when it breaks or is lost:> that is, when its unreflective use becomes problematic. (Nicolini, p. 34)

I first [encountered] Heidegger's idea of breakdown a few years ago when I read
@Winograd:1986, which applied the idea to the context of computing and design.
Since then it's popped up in the context of infrastructure studies as well as
work centered on [repair]. It might be useful to return to learn more about the
origins in Heidegger's work, perhaps through @Dreyfus:1991 who Nicolini
references quite a bit.

The chapter ends with a discussion of Wittgenstein and practice theory. I've
[encountered] Wittgenstein's work back when I was looking for to understand the
semantic web agenda back when I was working at the Library of Congress a few
years ago. His earlier and later career make for such a fascinating embodiment
of the problems of philosophy particular where sense making and mathematics
intersect @Halpin:2011. So it was fun to find another parallel between practice
theory and my own interests.

Nicolini references @Shotter:1997 when drawing attention to three ways in which
Wittgenstein's work informs practice theory:

* meaning is found outside in social practices, not in internal contemplation
* the function of following rules (or not following rules) as practices that can
  only be understood through hints, tips and examples.
* practices provide a criteria of truth, and understanding is demonstrated by 
  being extrapolate rules/practices further--how to go on

Wittgenstein's ideas of *forms of life* is also influential @Johannessen:1988,
because it brings attention to specific ways of acting, and day-to-day
performances. It is through the study of these that rules or practices can be
observed. 

### References

[encountered]: http://inkdroid.org/2011/05/02/a-bit-about-scruffiness/
[repair]: http://reclaimingrepair.com/
