---
layout: post
title: Discourse and Pragmatics
tags:
- edci788
- reading
---

*In keeping with past semesters I'm going to try posting my written notes for
class here. This is mostly peer pressure on myself to think about how I'm
writing a bit more publicly. Although the reality is it's mostly going to be
lost on the Web.*

*I'm taking two classes this semester Discourse Analysis ([edci788]) and
Documentation, Collection and Appraisal ([lbsc785]). The latter I'm technically
co-teaching with my advisor Ricky Punzalan, but the reality is I'm learning lots
about appraisal practices from him as well as the practitioners who are in the
class. The Discourse Analysis class requires a written summary each week, and
this is the first of those.*

*It's always a bit weird and maybe risky learning in public, but you only live
once right? [Ahem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eternal_return).  I'd love to
hear from you in comments/annotations here or on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/edsu) or [email](mailto:ehs@pobox.com) if any of
this gives you any ideas or prompts any questions.*

---

The readings this week focused on discourse and pragmatics.  @Paltridge:2012
defines pragmatics as the study of how the meaning of spoken and written
discourse is related to the context in which that speech and writing occurs.
Context here is taken to be the particular social situation that the discourse
takes place in, the other text or speech it is situated with, and any background
knowledge that it relies upon.

One of the foundational concepts in pragmatics is *speech act* theory, which is
the idea that words *do things* in the world. Words have a literal meaning that
can be analyzed for its truth or falsehood. But words also can be used to effect
change in the word, to perform actions. Searle distinguished between these two
types of acts as *locutionary* and *illocutionary* acts. And the actual action
that is caused by the words is the *perlocutionary* act.

One practical example of this is the act of saying "I do" in a marriage
ceremony.  The words have a literal meaning, and perform the action of becoming
legally married.  They are also tied to the social situation in which they
occur, the marriage ceremony, their partners speech and the speech of the
marriage official. This example also highlights how various conditions can
influence whether a specific speech act works or not. Austin called these
felicity conditions, which Searle interpreted somewhat rigidly as *rules*.

Pragmatics is also specifically concerned with the theoretical perspective of
the *cooperative principle*: that discourse is a function of participants having
a shared interest or purpose, which provides a unifying shape to the discourse,
which prevents it from just being a series of random and disconnected topics.
This idea was introduced by @Grice:1975 in which he provides four categories or
maxims that help identify the operation of the cooperative principle in
discourse:

- *quantity*: make contribution informative, but not more informative than needed
- *quality*: try to make a contribution that is true (not false, or lacking in
  evidence)
- *relation*: moves in topic need to fit certain parameters
- *manner*: how something is said (not what)

Grice uses these maxims in order to show how speech and language do not simply
fit into either a formal (scientific) or informal (humanistic) analysis.  To do
this he introduces the idea of the *implicature* which is a meaning that is not
explicitly provided in the literal analysis of the words in discourse, but can
be ascertained by looking at how speech interacts with the four maxims in
various ways:

* when a maxim is quietly violated
* when a participant explicitly opts-out from a maxim
* when the fulfillment of one maxim is in contradiction, tension with another 
  maxim: a clash
* when a maxim is openly disregarded or flouted

Grice uses very short snippets of conversation, mostly just paired statements: A
says this, B says this in response. He uses these snippets to illustrate the
fulfillment of the four maxims, and how this can give rise to implicatures, or
meanings that are not explicitly provided in the literal text.

In contrast @Kasper:2006 also looks at pragmatics but uses much longer sequences
of conversation. This makes sense because Kasper uses the lens of Conversation
Analysis to examine pragmatics, or meaning making. CA requires looking at more
than just pairs of utteranaces--at conversations. Kasper critiques the
rationalist foundations of Speech Act theory, by questioning the idea that the
meaning of an utterance is related to the internal state of the speaker, and
that in turn, the listener receives and internalizes that meaning. This
telementation model, where meaning is being transmitted from speaker to listener
does not, in Kasper's eyes, sufficiently describe the way that meaning is
arrived at or generated. For Kasper meaning is co-constructed by participants,
and rather than being transmitted it is emergent and highly contextual.
Conversation Analysis' attention to the specific details of full conversations
allows meaning and context to be understood in its specificity as collaborative
ventures, where the whole can be larger than the sum of its parts.

@Taguchi:2015 provides an example of using cross-cultural speech act theory to
look at competencies of language learners. Culture is an important dimension to
understanding the speech acts because the mechanics of speech, and the
significance of particular word choices are not necessarily portable across
cultures. Taguchi is specifically interested in how spending a year abroad can
change the learners cultural awareness and their ability to general speech acts,
or their language comptency. The specific research question was to see if
cultutral adjustment is correlated with language skill.

To achieve this Taguchi measures intercultural competence and pragmatic
competenece in a group of 20 Japanese language learners before and after their
semester abroad. Intercultural competence is measured using a tool called the
Cross-Cultural Adapatability Inventory, which is essentially a survey of 50
questions that measures several factors using a Likert scale. Pragmatic
competence is measures using an oral discourse complete test (DCT). This test
collects what language learners think they would say in a particular situation,
and the responses were then evaluated by Japanese speakers with respect to the
speech style and speech act using a six point scale. The results were then
analyzed statistically using the t-test to see if there was any correlation
between changes in cultural adaptability and language use. They found that
intercultural competence was correlated with appropriate speech acts, but not
with speech style. The authors conjectured that this could be the failing of the
DCT, or perhaps with their relatively small sample size.

The readings this week provided lots of different views on the idea of speech
acts and discourse pragmatics. It was clear to me on reading them that this is a
very deep area of research, where there is a great deal of theoretical work to
draw on. I haven't completely decided yet what I am going to be studying as part
of my research project yet. I'm specifically interested in looking at how
archivists decide what is valuable when collecting material from the Web, and I
have three different data sources in mind:

- a set of interviews I conducted with web archivists about their appraisal
  process
- online conversations in Internet Relay Chat between volunteer archivists in
  the ArchiveTeam community
- written collection development policies from different institutions

I think that discourse pragmatics could be used in all three, but probably would
work best in the first two because of their conversational aspect. The idea of
value in appraisal work is a slippery concept, and I think Grice's idea of
implicatures could be very useful in reading between the lines of how archivists
ascribe value to material. Also, looking at the discussion through a cooperative
lens could be useful since archivists do tend to look at what they are doing as
a cooperative enterprise: a community of practice that is centered on preserving
material for use by records creators and researchers. I also think Kasper's use
of conversational analysis could uncover emergent meanings in the interviews or
transcripts to help uncover new understandings about this community of practice,
its cooperative ideas and activities. I'm not particularly keen on making
statistical claims like Taguchi, mostly because I don't think questions of value
lend themselves to statistical analyses so much as they do qualitative measures.
But I'd like to be proven wrong if there are good tools for achieving that.

## References


[edci788]: /tag/edci788
[lbsc785]: /tag/lbsc785
