---
title: IS
layout: post
tags:
- edci788
- discourse
- reading
---

This week's readings were focused on Interaction Sociolinguistics (IS) which is
a field of discourse analysis that is situated at the intersection of
anthropology, sociology and linguistics. At a high level @Gordon:2011 defines IS
this way:

> IS offers theories and methods that enable researchers to explore not only 
> how language works but also to gain insights into the social processes 
> through which individuals build and maintain relationships, exercise power, 
> project and negotiate identities, and create communities.

IS typically uses recordings obtained through ethnography to identify signaling
mechanisms or contextual cues. Breakdowns in communication happen when
participants don't share contextualization conventions, which can contribute to
social problems such as stereotyping and differential access. Looking at the
role of discourse in creating and reinforcing social problems was a specific 
theme in Gumperz work. It seems much in keeping with the goals of CDA, to
interrogate power relationships, but perhaps without such an explicit
theoretical framework, like what Marx or Foucault provide.

If this sounds similar to previous
weeks' focus on [Ethnography of
Communication](https://inkdroid.org/2017/02/12/ec/) and [Critical Discourse
Analysis](https://inkdroid.org/2017/03/08/cda/) that's because, well, they are
pretty similar. But there are some notable differences. The first notable one is
something @Gordon:2011, highlights: things start with
[John Gumperz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_J._Gumperz). Gumperz was
trained as a linguist, but his research and work brought him into close contact
with some of the key figures in sociology and anthropology at the time.

Gumperz work grew out of developing "replicable methods of qualitative analysis
that account for our ability to interpret what participants intend to convey in
everyday communicative practices". He drew on and synthesized several areas of
theoretical and methodological work:

* structural linguistics: ideas of communicative competence, when (and when 
  not) to speak, what to talk about, who to talk to, what manner to talk in,
  subconscious/automatic speech, and regional linguistic diversity.
* ethnography of communication: the use of participant observation and 
  interviewing and data collection as "thick description" (from
  [Geertz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clifford_Geertz))
* ethnomethodology: from nature of social interaction, and the background
  knowledge needed to participate.  [*Garfinkeling*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Garfinkel) experiments where the researcher breaks social norms in 
  order to discover unknown social norms. 
* conversation analysis: interaction order, frames, face saving, how
  conversation represents and creates social organization, and a focus on 
  "micro features of interaction" while also allowing for cultural context.
  (from [Goffman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erving_Goffman)

Gumperz developed the idea of contextualization cues and how indexical signs
offer a way of discovering how discourse is framed.
[Bateson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregory_Bateson) calls these
metamessages, or messages about how to interpret messages.

He also established the concept of conversational inference, which is how 
people assess what other people say in order to create meaning.
It is an idea that bears a lot of resemblance to Grice's idea of from CA of 
the cooperative principle, and how implicatures are sent by following or 
breaking maxims. 

The idea of indirectness, linguistic politeness and face saving from [Robin
Lakoff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robin_Lakoff) also factor into IS. The
choices speakers make (rate, pitch, amplitude) that affect an utterance's
interpretation. [Tannen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deborah_Tannen)'s IS work
also demonstrated how cultural background, race, ethnicity, gender and sexual
orientation were factors in conversational style. IS admits generative grammar
([Chomsky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noam_Chomsky)) as a theory, but does 
not limit study of language to just grammar, and allows for issues of context 
and culture to have a role. I basically think of IS saying "yes, and" to CA: it
recognizes all the patterns and structures that CA identifies, but doesn't limit
work to just the text, and provides a framework where context is relevant and
important to understanding.

The other article we read by Gordon took a deep dive into an empirical study
that uses IS methods [@Gordon:2012]. The authors examine email correspondence 
between school counselors in training with their supervising professor. They
make the point that not much work has been done on supervision in the medium 
of email. Specifically they examine how identity development can be seen as 
ongoing face negotiation. Their research draws on work around face negotiation 
and politeness theory from @Goffman:1967, as well as @Arundale:2006's idea of
face as a con-constructed understanding of self in relation to others.

Specifically their work is centered on the notion that face, politeness and 
identity are interconnected:

* face is the social value a person can claim by the way people receive that
  person's verbal and nonverbal acts.
* they are connected through Lave and Wenger (1991)'s idea of community of
  practice.
* "The notion of face is crucial to understanding how novices develop 
  professional identities within a community of practice." (p. 114)
* politeness strategies are employed in online communications (email)

They collected the email of 8 (6F, 2M) participants, who sent at least one email
per week over 14 weeks to their supervisor. These participants were learning how
to be school counselors. The authors used data-driven discourse analysis with 
IS and computer-mediated discourse analysis [@Herring:2004]. Among their
findings they discovered taht:

- constructed dialogue or reported speech and metadiscourse are used to raise 
  face which they argue is part of identity construction
- first person plural pronouns (we, us and our) are used to create shared 
  alignment as well as give advice while saving face
- use of discourse markers @Schiffrin:1988 to structure ideas, meanings and
  interaction. For example "that being said" which is used by by the
  supervisors to offer criticism while also saving face
- repetition is used to construct conversational worlds and establish
  communities of practice. It is possible that its used more in email because
  previous word usage can easily be recalled and copied, as compared with 
  spoken words.

@Tannen:2007 seems to be cited a fair bit in this paper as sources for
these patterns. Perhaps it could be a good source of types of patterns to look
for in my own data? I particular like the angle on *community of practice* which
is something I'm looking to explore in my own research into web archiving.

Ironically it is another book by @Tannen:1984 that is included as the next set
of readings--specifically two chapters that analyze a set of conversations that
happen over a Thanksgiving dinner. The rich description of this conversation (in
which the author is a participant) offers many methodological jumping off 
points for IS work. Tannen does a pretty masterful job of weaving the
description of the conversation, often with detailed transcription, with the
reflections from her and the other participants, and observations from discourse
analysis. It is clear that she recorded the conversations and then reviewed them
with participants afterwards. Here's a list of some of the methodological tools
she used when analyzing the converstation, there were a lot!

* conversations as a continuous stream that are punctuated into separate events 
  that respond to each other [@Bateson:1972]

* machine gun question: rapid fire questions which are meant them to show 
  enthusiasm and interest, but can lead to defensiveness.

* latching: when responses follow directly on from each other [@Scheinkein:1978]

* dueting: jointly holding one side of the conversation [@Falk:1979]

* buffering talk: for example "and all that" which can be used to save face when
  positioning.

* [back channel responses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backchannel_(linguistics)) which serve to meta-conversational purposes when the mode of communication is mostly one way [Yngve:1970]

* deviations from answer/question as adjacency pair [@Sacks:1974]

* sharing in conversational form and pacing is participation, even when 
  specific knowledge is not being exhibited

* formulaic or repeated phrases

* shared revelations: to create personal connections

* reduced syntactic form: "You survive?" instead of "Do you survive?"

* intonational contours (interesting mode of illustration)

* metaphorical code switching [@Blom:1972]

## Reflection
 
Generally speaking I enjoyed the readings this week, in particular the piece by
Tannen which does a really nice job of exhibiting the various discourse features
and explaining their significance in understanding the Thanksgiving dinner
conversation. The ultimate realization of cultural differences that explain why
some of the conversations played out the way they did, and why they were
remembered by participants in particular ways seemed to be what made this an IS
study. The fact that this contextual information (nationality, ethnicity) have a
place when understanding the language seems like an important distinction for IS
work. It also speaks to making the analysis relevant--one isn't merely
identifying patterns in the discourse but also casting those patterns in a light
where greater insight is achieved. This seems like an important dimension for
research to have. Even the @Gordon:2012 piece seemed to draw some pretty sound
inferences and conclusions about the research. This speaks to the pragmatist in
me.

I also liked the mode of data collection and analysis since it seemed to strike
a good balance between the detail and rigor of Conversational Analysis and the
openness to context and thick description offered by Ethnography of
Communication. I will admit to feeling a bit overwhelmed with the number of
discourse features that were covered, and worry that I wouldn't be able to draw
on them as successfully as the authors. But I guess this must come with
practice.

With regards to my own research the discussion of IS got me wondering if it might be fruitful to examine my interviews for segments where participants
talked about how they understood web archiving processes like crawling or 
external systems like CMS. Specifically I'd like to see where their own 
experience and knowledge was shaped or formed by a community if practice.
Thinking of GWU's understanding of the data center - or Stanford's idea about 
how a particular CMS worked, or NCSU's understanding of DNS. I'm still really
interested in this idea of a *community of practice* and it seems like using
discourse as a window into this realm might be something other folks have done
before. What are the methods that could best yield insights into this in my
data?

## References
