---
layout: post
title: EC
tags:
- edci788
- ethnography
- discourse
- reading
---

The readings this week focused on the Ethnography of Communication or EC. EC
seeks to examine the particular cultural conditions of communication and also
its general principles. EC takes as its material not just spoken or written
language but also images, gestures, smell, digital, digital content and
basically any cultural material that anthropologists use. In his overview
of the field @Carbaugh:2014 credits @Gumperz:1972 as establishing the foundation
for EC.  Gumperz and Hymes were both linguists and anthropologists and helped
found the study of linguistic anthropologists. 

The focus on EC is to look for patterns and practices in speech communities, and
considers several key concepts:

- **communication act**: a specific communicative action (uttering something)
- **communication event**: a sequence of acts (a series of utterances)
- **communication situation**: a place which may involve multiple acts/events
- **speech community**: a social grouping of communicators
- **a way of speaking**: a patterned behavior

Just as an aside, it is interesting to note that EC is heavily invested in
the notions of community and communication, and that both words share the same
root. Hymes came up with the useful mnemonic SPEAKING, which is a device or
framework that characterize the types of phenomena EC researchers examine:
Settings, Participants, Ends, Acts, Key/pitch, Instruments for communication,
Norms, and Genre.

As with other ethnographic work, EC is iterative and cyclical. Study of the
literature and theory precedes actual field work, which is followed by analysis
and reporting. But each of these stages can feed back into the other.  For
example when analyzing field notes leads the researcher to return to field to
interview a new contact or observe another situation. Also, it is important in
ethnographic work that meanings are discovered throughout the process, rather
than decided beforehand.

@Philipsen:1987 argued that analysis shouldn't be centered so much on the
individual, but should instead focus on the collective or communal aspects of
meaning, alignment and form from three perspectives:

* Culture as Code: order and organization
* Culture as Conversation: dynamism/creativity
* Culture as Community: the setting

Culture as Code was formalized by @Philipsen:2005 as Speech Code Theory, which
starts out by cataloging a set of speech resources (spoken words and written
texts) which are examined in order to investigate "a system of socially
constructed symbols and meanings, premises, and rules, pertaining to
communicative conduct". I actually think this approach could be useful for me to
examine the interviews I have with web archivists in coordination with their
collection development policies. Perhaps I could zoom in on a particular one to
see how the language operates?

@Carbaugh:2011 highlights the importance of reflexivity as a method in EC.
Specifically discursive reflexivity, or the ability to render/reason through
discourse, while reflecting on how we use discourse to study discourse, is the
mechanism.  Reflexivity is a core concept in ethnographic work, where the
researcher themselves are a research tool being used. It takes on several
aspects in EC work:

- **Theoretical Reflexivity**: using reflexive moment to understanding
  communication
- **Descriptive Reflexivity**: how is a reflexive moment being represented? what
  is selected and what is not? How are decisions accounted for? Need to be aware
  of our own goals and attitudes, and how they are interwoven into descriptive
  work. 
- **Interpretive Reflexivity**: what is the meaning/significance of the
  communication practices.
- **Comparative Reflexivity**: provides different views on a communicative moment
  and multiple meanings. This idea of the multiple reminds me of @Mol:2002 and 
  @Law:2004 a bit. Verbal vs Print knowledge can be useful to compare,
  especially when focusing on areas of misunderstanding or disagreement.
- **Critical Reflexivity**: examining a communication practice from the
  perspective of an standardized ethic.

I actually think reflexivity is really important in my own work studying the
construction of web archives, because I myself am a practitioner. My familiarity
with web archiving community as a community of practice definitely influenced
the way I spoke to archivists--I was a participant in the process. Being able to
think critically about my role in the interviews, and my selection of policies
to examine are an important part of the research.

@Duff:2002 provided a great example of an empirical study that employed EC. I
was particularly struck by her detailed description of the classroom, that
included registries of the students and their backgrounds, a map of the
classroom and the positions of the student groups, daily agendas, and fairly
lengthy transcripts of conversation.

These materials were drawn together with a lucid description of the community
setting, and the goals of the school to encourage cross-cultural understanding.
I really felt like I came to understand the specific settings she chose. This
allowed her to make describe the successes and failures of validating and
rebroadcasting comments from students during lessons about culture. Attention to
word counting, turn taking, pauses and sequencing provided a view into the
dynamics of the classroom. Ethnographic interviews with the students also
confirmed some of her findings.

In general I finished the readings this week thinking that EC approaches could
hold a lot of promise for my own research. I think this is partly because my
interviews with web archivists was conducted using an ethnographic method. I
wasn't out to prove or disprove a particular hypothesis. I just wanted to try to
understand how appraisal of web content took place in the field. I think it
might be useful to select an interview or two from the 30 interviews I conducted
to take a closer look from a discourse perspective. Perhaps there are things I
missed during my coding of all the interviews. 

Another angle that could be interesting would be to look at an interview and a
collection development policy, to see how they compare. It might be possible to
look at the collections of web content themselves, which was suggested by Prof.
Fagan last week. My only worry with that is that there might be *too much*
material at different levels. This was mentioned as one of the challenges of EC,
because of the volume of material that is difficult to integrate because it is
from different perspectives: etic (from outside) and emic (from within).

Certainly using a diversity of material, and embracing the messiness of method,
is more appealing (and realistic) to me more than focusing exclusively on the
text of a particular transcript. I suspect that EC is going to be a useful
method for me in discourse analysis. I guess I worry that the hyperfocus on a
particular text transcript by itself will run the risk of me projecting my own
ideas, rather than seeing what is actually going on. But perhaps I will be
surprised when we come to the other discourse methods later in the semester.

## References 
