---
layout: post
title: Twitter and Tear Gas
tags:
- twitter
- reading
- activism
---

<a href="http://www.twitterandteargas.org"><img style="width: 200px; float:
left; margin-right: 20px;" class="img-responsive" src="/images/teargas.jpg"></a>

*Twitter and Tear Gas: The Power and Fragility of Networked Protest by Zeynep Tufekci. New Haven, Yale University Press, 2017, xxxi+ 326 pp. (hardcover), 978-0-300-21512-0. [https://www.twitterandteargas.org/](https://www.twitterandteargas.org/)*

*Originally published in [Internet Histories](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/24701475.2017.1383639).*

---

In August 2014 I took part in a [panel
conversation](https://inkdroid.org/2014/08/14/one-big-archive/) at the Society
of American Archivists meeting in Washington DC that focused on the imperative
for archivists to interrogate the role of power, ethics and regulation in
information systems. The conference itself stands out in my memory, because it
began on 10 August, the day after [Michael
Brown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shooting_of_Michael_Brown) was killed by
police officer Darren Wilson in [Ferguson,
Missouri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ferguson,_Missouri). I distinctly
remember the hand that shot up immediately during the Q&A period to ask what, if
anything, we will remember of the voices from Ferguson in social media, that
raised awareness of the injustice that had occurred there. Before anyone had
much of a chance to respond another voice asked whether anyone had seen the
[blog
post](https://medium.com/message/ferguson-is-also-a-net-neutrality-issue-6d2f3db51eb0)
about how radically different Twitter and Facebook’s presentations of Ferguson
were. The topic of power, ethics and regulation were not simply academic
subjects for discussion, they were demands for understanding from information
professionals actively engaged in the work of historical production.

The blog post mentioned that day was [What Happens to #Ferguson Affects
Ferguson](https://medium.com/message/ferguson-is-also-a-net-neutrality-issue-6d2f3db51eb0)
by [Zeynep Tufekci](https://twitter.com/zeynep). It was published on the social
media platform Medium, as the sustained protests in Ferguson began to propel the
hashtag [#BlackLivesMatter](https://blacklivesmatter.com) into many Twitter
timelines and newsrooms around the world.  Like so much of her work, Tufekci’s
post asked her readers to think critically about the algorithmic shift we have
been witnessing in our media and culture since the advent of the web and the
rise of social media. Tufekci is a consummate public scholar, who uses online
spaces like her [blog](http://technosociology.org/),
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/zeynep), [Medium](https://medium.com/@zeynep),
[TED talks](https://www.ted.com/speakers/zeynep_tufekci) and editorials in the
[The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/author/zeynep-tufekci/) and [The New
York Times](https://www.nytimes.com/column/zeynep-tufekci) to advance a crucial
discussion of how the affordances of information technology are both shaped, and
being shaped, by social movements and political infrastructures. It is a pivotal
time for scholars to step out from the pages of academic journals and into the
World Wide Web spaces that are grappling with the impact of [post-truth
politics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post-truth_politics) and [fake
news](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fake_news).  It is into this time and place
that Tufekci’s first book Twitter and Tear Gas: The Power and Fragility of
Networked Protest is launched.

Tufekci’s book is divided into three main parts 1) Making a Movement, 2) A
Protester’s Tools, and 3) After the Protests. While these suggest a
chronological ordering to the discussion, the different parts, and the ten
chapters found within them, reflect a shifting attention to the specifics of
networked social movements. Part 1 provides the reader with a general discussion
of how the networked public sphere operates with respect to social movements.
This is followed by Part 2 which takes a deeper dive into the specific
affordances and sociotechnical logics of social media platforms such as Twitter,
Facebook and Google. And finally, Part 3 integrates the previous discussion by
articulating a theory for how social movements function in, and through, online
spaces. 

Throughout the book Tufekci focuses on the specifics of protest and
counter-protest, while stressing that social media spaces are not disembodied
and virtual phenomena, but are actual, contingent configurations of people,
technology and power. In teasing out the dimensions of networked public sphere
Tufekci reminds me of Kelty’s concept of a [recursive public](http://twobits.net/) in which the public’s participants are actively
engaged in the maintenance, modification and design of the technical and
material means that sustain the public itself [@Kelty:2008]. In many ways
Twitter and Tear Gas hacks the sociopolitical systems that it describes. It’s no
mistake that the book is licensed with the Creative Commons and is freely
[downloadable](https://www.twitterandteargas.org/downloads/twitter-and-tear-gas-by-zeynep-tufekci.pdf)
from it's [companion website](https://www.twitterandteargas.org).

<figure>
  <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gezi_Park_protests"><img class="img-responsive" src="/images/gezi.jpg"></a>
  <figcaption><a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2013_Taksim_Gezi_Park_protests_(15th_June).jpg">2013 Taksim Square</a> by Fleshstorm</figcaption>
</figure>


Prior to her academic career, Tufekci worked as a software developer at IBM
where she first encountered the information infrastructure we call the Internet.
You can sense this training and engagement with practice in her work which
always seems to be pushing up against, but not overstepping, the art of what is
possible. As a sociologist she brings the eye of an ethnographer to her study of
protest. Tufekci is not a distant observer, but a participant, with actual
stakes in the political outcomes she describes. She is pictured on the dust
jacket wearing a helmet to protect her from tear gas canisters that were shot
into the crowd that she was a part of in the [Gezi Park
protests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gezi_Park_protests). The book sits on
the solid foundations of her own experience as well as the experiences of
activists and organisers that she interviews. But Twitter and Tear Gas also
significantly engages with sociological theories to bring clarity and
understanding to how social media and social movements are co-produced.

In the pages of Twitter and Tear Gas you will find scenes of protests from
around the world that are put into conversation with each other. From
[Zapatista](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zapatista_Army_of_National_Liberation)
solidarity networks, to the
[disruption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1999_Seattle_WTO_protests) of the
World Trade Organization in Seattle, the global [anti-war
protests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post%E2%80%93September_11_anti-war_movement)
after 9/11, to [Occupy]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupy_movement) in
Zuccotti Park, the Egyptian Revolution in [Tahrir
Square](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_revolution_of_2011), the Gezi
Park protests in Istanbul, the
[Indignados](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-austerity_movement_in_Spain) in
the Plaza del Sol, the [Umbrella
Movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umbrella_Movement) in Hong Kong, and
[BlackLivesMatter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Lives_Matter) in
Ferguson, Missouri.  Twitter and Tear Gas functions as a historical document
that describes how individuals engaged in political action were empowered and
inextricably bound up with social media platforms.  While it provides a useful
map of the terrain for those of us in the present, I suspect that Twitter and
Tear Gas will also be an essential text for future historians who are trying to
reconstruct how these historical movements were entangled with information
technology, when the applications, data sources and infrastructures no longer
exist, or have been transformed by neglect, mergers and acquisitions, or the
demands for something new, into something completely different. Even if we have
web archives that preserve some "sliver of a sliver" of the past web
[@Harris:2002] we still need to remember the stories of interaction and the
technosocial contingencies that these dynamic platforms provided. Despite all
the advances we have seen in information technology a book is still a useful way
to do this.

One of the primary theoretical contributions of this text is the concept of
[capacity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_building), or a social
movement’s ability to marshal end effect narrative, electoral and disruptive
change. Tufekci outlines how the
[affordances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affordance) of social media
platforms make possible the leaderless
[adhocracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adhocracy) of just-in-time protests,
and how these compare to our historical understanding of the [African-American
Civil Rights
Movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_Civil_Rights_Movement_(1954%E2%80%931968))
in the United States. The use of hashtags in Twitter allow protesters to
communicate at a great speed and distance to mobilise direct action in near real
time. Planning the Civil Rights Movement took over a decade, and involved the
development of complex communication networks to support long term strategic
planning.

Being able to skip this capacity building phase allows networked social
movements to respond more quickly and in a more decentralised fashion. This
gives movements currency and can make them difficult for those in power to
control. But doing so can often land these agile protests in what Tufekci calls
a tactical freeze, where, after an initial successful march, the movement is
unable to make further collective decisions that will advance their cause. In
some ways this argument recalls @Gladwell:2010 who uses the notion of [weak
ties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpersonal_ties#Weak_tie_hypothesis)
[@Granovetter:1973] to contend that social media driven protests are
fundamentally unable to produce significant activism on par with what was
achieved during the civil rights era. But Tufekci is making a more nuanced point
that draws upon a separate literature to make her argument, notably the capacity
in development work of @Sen:1993 and the [capability
theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability_approach) of justice of
@Nussbaum:2003. Tufekci’s application of these concepts to social movements, and
her categories of capacity, combined with the mechanics of signaling by which
capacities observed and responded to operate as a framework for understanding
why we cannot use simple outcome measures, such as numbers of people who attend
a protest, when trying to understand the impact of networked social movements.
For those who are listening she is also pointing to an area that is much in need
of innovation, experimentation and study: tools and practices for collective
decision-making that will allow people to thaw these tactical freezes.

Another significant theoretical thread running through Twitter and Tear Gas
concerns the important role that attention plays in understanding the dynamics
of networked protest. Social media is well understood as an attention economy,
where users work for likes and retweets to get eyes on their content. Social and
financial rewards can follow from this attention. While networked protest
operates in a similar fashion, the dynamics of attention can often work against
its participants, as they criticise each other in order to distinguish
themselves. Tufekci also relates how the affordances of advertising platforms
such as Google and Facebook made it profitable for [Macedonian
teenagers](https://www.wired.com/2017/02/veles-macedonia-fake-news/) to craft
and spread fake news stories that would draw attention away from traditional
news sources, generate clicks and ad revenue, and as a side effect, profoundly
disrupt political discourse.

Perhaps most significant is the new role that attention denial plays in online
spaces, as a tactic employed by the state and other actors seeking to shape
public opinion. Tufekci calls this the Reverse-Streisand Effect, since it uses
the Internet to funnel attention to topics other than a particular topic at
hand. She highlights the work of @King:2013 that analysed how China’s so-called
[50 Cent Army](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/50_Cent_Party) of web commenters
shapes public opinion not simply by censoring material on the web, but by
drawing attention elsewhere at key moments. Social media platforms are
geo-political arenas, where bot armies are deployed to [drown
out](https://www.wired.com/2015/08/pro-government-twitter-bots-try-hush-mexican-activists/)
hashtags and thwart communication, or attack individuals with threats and
volumes of traffic that severely disrupt the target’s use of the platform. When
people’s eyes can be guided, or pushed away, censorship is no longer needed. It
is truly chilling to consider the lengths that those in power, or seeking power,
might stoop to, in order to provide these events when needed.  

<figure>
  <a hef="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_microphone"><img class="img-responsive" src="/images/mic.jpg"></a>
  <figcaption><a
  href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Day_14_Occupy_Wall_Street_September_30_2011_Shankbone_2.JPG">Friday, Day 14 of Occupy Wall Street</a>
  by David Shankbone</figcaption>
</figure>

As significant as these theoretical contributions are, it is Tufekci’s personal
voice combined with flashes of insight that I remember most from Twitter and
Tear Gas. Details such as the use of the use of Occupy’s [human
microphone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_microphone) to amplify speaker’s
voices and shape speech is a poignant metaphor for Twitter’s capacity for
amplifying short message bursts that cascade through the network as retweets. In
another Tufekci considers why so many protest camps set up libraries, and
connects the work being done in social media to the work of pamphleteers
throughout history. She describes the surreal experience of watching pastel
hearts float across [Periscope](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periscope_(app)) videos from Turkish Parliamentarians that were
preparing to be bombed during an attempted coup. Near the end of the book she
draws an analogy between the rise of fake news fueled by social media, and the
ways in which Gutenberg’s printing press escalated the Catholic Church’s
distribution of [indulgences](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indulgences), opening itself up to the criticism found in
Luther’s 95 theses--which were also printed. The stories work is generative of a
humanistic outlook that does not deny or celebrate big data:

> There is no perfect, ideal platform for social movements. There is no
> neutrality or impartiality--ethics, norms, identities, and compromise permeate
> all discussions and choices of design, affordances, policies, and algorithms
> on online platforms. And yet given the role of the these platforms in
> governance and expression, acknowledging and exploring these ramifications and
> dimensions seems more important than ever. (p. 185)

In fact, saying that Tufekci’s book has an explicit narrative arc is an
oversimplification. It functions more like a fabric that weaves theory,
observation and story, as topics are introduced and returned to later; there is
no set chronology or teleology that is being pursued. On finishing the book it
is clear how the concepts of attention and capacity are present throughout. But
Tufekci makes these theoretical connections not with over abstraction and heavy
citation, but by presenting scenes of protest where these concepts are being
enacted. While there are certainly references to the supporting literature, the
text is not densely packed with them. Finer theoretical manoeuvres are reserved
for the endnotes, and do not overwhelm the reader as they move through the text.
If you are teaching a course that surveys either communications, sociology or
the politics of social media platforms and information infrastructures more
generally Twitter and Tear Gas belongs on your syllabus. Your students will
thank you: they can download the book for free, they can follow Tufekci on
Twitter and Facebook, and her book speaks directly to the socio-political moment
we are all living in.

## References
