---
layout: post
title: Assemblages of Appraisal
tags:
- web archives
- ethnography
- appraisal
---

*I had the opportunity to put together a [poster](/talks/aeri2017.pdf) for
[AERI](http://aeri2017.org) this year. The poster presents a paper that I
recently gave at CSCW [@Summers:2017]. Creating it was a surprisingly useful
process of distilling the paper to its essentials while re-presenting it
visually. It occurred to me that the poster session audience and the typical web
audience have something in common: limited attention. So I reworked the poster
content here as a blog post to try to make my research findings a bit more
accessible.*

---

Even after over 20 years of active web archiving we know surprisingly little
about how archivists appraise and select web content for preservation.  Since we
canâ€™t keep it all, how we decide what to keep from the web is certain to shape
the historical record [@Cook:2011]. In this context, we ask the following
research questions: 

1. How are archivists deciding what to collect from the web?

2. How do technologies for web archiving figure in their appraisal decisions?

3. Are there opportunities to design more useful systems for the appraisal of
   content for web archives?

### Methodology

<img style="margin-right: 10px; float: left;" src="/images/aeri-notes.jpg">

To answer these questions I conducted a series ethnographic interviews with 29
individuals involved in the selection of web content. Participants include web
archivists as well as researchers, managers, local government employees,
volunteers, social activists, and entrepreneurs. The field notes from these
interviews were analyzed using inductive thematic analysis. 

Analysis began with reading all the field notes together, followed by line by
line coding. While coding was done without reference to an explicit theoretical
framework, it was guided by an interest in understanding archival appraisal as a
sociotechnical and algorithmic system [@Botticelli:2000 ; @Kitchin:2016].

### Findings

Coding and analysis surfaced six interconnected and interdependent themes that
fell into two categories, the social and the technical, which are illustrated
here in green and yellow respectively.

<img class="img-responsive center-block" src="/images/aeri-diagram.png">

Appraisal in the context of web archiving is a complex interplay between the following:

<img src="/images/aeri-search.png" style="float: left; height: 50px; margin-right: 10px;"> **Crawl Modalities:** The selection strategies designed into tools and chosen by archivists in their work: domains, websites, documents, topics, and events.

<img src="/images/aeri-info.png" style="height: 50px; float: left; margin-right: 10px;"> **Information Structures:** Specific formations of web content that archivists interacted with during appraisal: hierarchies, networks, streams, and lists.

<img src="/images/aeri-tool.png" style="float: left; height: 50px; margin-right: 10px;"> **Tools:** Configurations of tools that were used: archiving services, storage, spreadsheets, email, social media, content management systems.

<img src="/images/aeri-people.png" style="float: left; height: 45px; margin-right: 10px;"> **People:** Field archivists, managers, technicians, journalists, volunteers, software developers, groups (activists, professional), and institutions.

<img src="/images/aeri-time.png" style="float: left; height: 50px; margin-right: 10px;"> **Time:** How long to collect, how often to collect, how quickly web content needed to be gathered, perceptions of change in content.

<img src="/images/aeri-money.png" style="float: left; height: 30px; margin-right: 10px;"> **Money:** Grants from foundations and agencies to support collection activities, staffing, subscription fees, relationship between money and storage.

### Conclusion

The findings highlighted sites of breakdown that are illustrated by the red
lines in the thematic diagram. These breakdowns are examples of infrastructural
inversion [@Bowker:2000], or sites where the infrastructure of web archiving
became legible.

Breakdowns between People and Tools were seen in the use of external
applications such as email, spreadsheets and forms to provide missing
communication features for documenting provenance and appraisal decisions.

Breakdowns between Crawl Modalities, Information Structures and Tools were also
evident when archivists improvised communication tools to coordinate selection
decisions when geopolitical boundaries complicated collection policies.

Breakdowns in Money, Crawl Modalities and Information Structures occurred when
archivists could not determine how much it would cost to archive a website, and
attempted to estimate the size of websites.

<figure class="center-block" style="font-size: smaller;">
<img style="width: 40%;" src="/images/aeri-archiveit.png">
<img style="width: 50%;" src="/images/aeri-archive.jpg">
<br>
<figcaption class="text-center">Appraisal decisions depend on visualizations of the material archive.</figcaption>
</figure>
<br>

While our chosen research methodology and findings do not suggest specific
implications for design [@Dourish:2011] they do highlight rich sites for for
repair work as well as improvisational and participatory design [@Jackson:2014].

### Acknowledgments

Thank you to Ricky Punzalan for much guidance during the planning and execution
of the study. Leah Findlater and Jessica Vitak also helped in the selection of
research methods. Nicholas Taylor, Jess Ogden and Samantha Abrams provided lots
of useful feedback on early drafts, as well as pointers into the literature that
were extremely helpful.

I also want to thank the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities and
the Documenting the Now project (funded by the Mellon Foundation) who provided
generous support for this research. My most heartfelt thanks are reserved for
the members of the web archiving community who shared their time, expertise and
wisdom with me.

Noun Project images by Nirbhay, il Capitano, Creative Stall, Setyo Ari Wibowo, Agni, and Shuaib Usman Yusuf.

## References

