---
layout: post
title: Prospectus
---


*I've been trying to keep this blog updated as I move through the PhD program at
the UMD iSchool. Sometimes it's difficult to share things here because of fear
that the content or ideas are just too rough around the edges. The big
assumption being that anybody even finds it, and then finds the time to read the
content.*

*As with most PhD programs the work is leading up to the dissertation. I'm
finishing my coursework this semester and so I have put together a preliminary
prospectus for the research I'd like to do in my dissertation. I'm going to
spend the next 8 months or so doing a lot of background reading and writing
about it, in order to set up this research. This prospectus will get revised and
added to over the coming months before I defend it in the fall.  But I thought
I'd share the prospectus in this preliminary state to see if anyone has
suggestions for things to read or angles to take.*

*Many thanks to Ricky Punzalan for his help getting me this far.*

---

### Appraisal Practices in Web Archives

It is difficult to imagine today’s scientific, cultural and political systems
without the web and the underlying Internet. As the web has become a dominant
form of global communications and publishing over the last 25 years we have
witnessed the emergence of web archiving as an increasingly important activity.
Web archiving is the practice of collecting content from the web for
preservation, which is then made accessible at another part of the web known as
a web archive. Developing record keeping practices for web content is extremely
important for the production of history [@Brugger:2017] and for sustaining the
networked public sphere [@Benkler:2006]. However, even with widespread practice
we still understand very little about the processes by which web content is
being selected for an archive.

Part of the reason for this is that the web is an immensely large, decentralized
and constantly changing information landscape. Despite efforts to archive the
entire web [@Kahle:2007], the idea of a complete archive of the web remains both
economically infeasible [@Rosenthal:2012],  and theoretically impossible
[@Masanes:2006]. Features of the web’s Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), such
as code-on-demand [@Fielding:2000], content caching [@Fielding:2014] and
personalization [@Barth:2011], have transformed what was originally conceived of
as a document oriented web into an information system that delivers information
based on who you are, when you ask, and what software you use
[@BernersLee:2000].  The very notion of a singular artifact that can be
archived, which has been under strain since the introduction of electronic
records [@Bearman:1989], is now being pushed to its conceptual limit.

The web is also a site of constant breakdown [@Bowker:2000] in the form of
broken links, failed business models, unsustainable infrastructure, obsolescence
and general neglect. @Ceglowski:2011 has estimated that about a quarter of all
links break every 7 years. Even within highly curated regions of the web, such
as scholarly publishing [@Sanderson:2011] and jurisprudence [@Zittrain:2014]
rates of link rot can be as high as 50%. Web archiving projects work in varying
measures to stem this tide of loss–to save what is deemed worth saving before it
becomes *404 Not Found*. In many ways web archiving can be seen as a form of
repair or maintenance work [@Graham:2007 ; @Jackson:2014] that is conducted by
archivists in collaboration with each other, as well as with tools and
infrastructures that support their efforts.

Deciding what to keep and what gets to be labeled *archival* have long been a
topic of discussion in archival science. Over the past two centuries archival
researchers have developed a body of literature around the concept of appraisal,
which is the practice of identifying and retaining records of enduring value.
The rapid increase in the amount of records being generated, which began in the
mid-20th century, led to the inevitable realization that it is impractical to
attempt to preserve the complete documentary record. Appraisal decisions must be
made, which necessarily shape the archive over time, and by extension our
knowledge of the past [@Bearman:1989 ; @Cook:2011].  It is in the particular
contingencies of the historical moment that the archive is created, sustained
and used [@Booms:1987 ; @Harris:2002]. The desire for a technology that enables
a complete archival record of the web, where everything is preserved and
remembered in an archival panopticon, is an idea that has deep philosophical
roots, and many social and political ramifications [@Brothman:2001 ;
@Mayer:2011].

Notwithstanding these theoretical and practical complexities, the construction
of web archives presents new design opportunities for archivists to work in
collaboration with each other, as well as with the systems, services and bespoke
software solutions used for performing the work. It is essential for these
designs to be informed by a better understanding of the processes by which web
content is selected for an archive. What are the approaches and theoretical
underpinnings for appraisal in web archiving as a sociotechnical appraisal
practice? To lay the foundation for answering this question I will be reviewing
and integrating the research literature in three areas: Archives and Memory,
Sociotechnical Systems (STS), and Praxiography.

Clearly, a firm grounding in the literature of appraisal practices in archives
is an important dimension to this research project. Understanding the various
appraisal techniques that have been articulated and deployed will help in
assessing how these techniques are being translated to the appraisal of web
content [@Maemura:2016]. Particular attention will be paid to emerging practices
for the appraisal of electronic records and web content. Because the web is a
significantly different medium than archives have traditionally dealt with it is
important to situate archival appraisal within the larger context of social or
collective memory practices [@Jacobsen:2013]. In addition, the emerging practice
of participatory archiving will also be examined to gain insight into how the
web is allowing the gatekeeping role of the archivist.

Appraisal practices for web content necessarily involve the use of computer
technology as both the means by which the archival processing is performed, and
as the source of the content that is being archived. Any analysis of appraisal
practices must account for the ways in which the archivist and the technology of
the web work together as part of a sociotechnical system. While the specific
technical implementations of web archiving systems are of interest, the subject
of archival appraisal requires that these systems be studied for their social
and cultural and effects. The interdisciplinary approach of software studies
provide a theoretical and methodological approach for analyzing computer
technologies as assemblages of software, hardware, standards and social
practices. Examining the literature of software studies as it relates to
archival appraisal will also selectively include reading in the related areas of
infrastructure, platform and algorithm studies.

Finally, since archival appraisal is at its core a practice it is imperative to
theoretically ground an analysis of appraisal using the literature of practice
theory or praxiography. Praxiography is a broad interdisciplinary field of
research that draws upon branches of anthropology, sociology, history of science
and philosophy in order to understand practice as a sociomaterial phenomena.
Ethnographic attention to topics such as rules, strategies, outcomes, training,
mentorship, artifacts, work and history also provide an approach to empirical
study that I plan on using in my research.

### Timeline

February, 2018 - Committee Review

September, 2018 - Propectus Final Draft

### Reading

#### Archives and Memory

Anderson, K. D. (2011). Appraisal Learning Networks: How University Archivists
Learn to Appraise Through Social Interaction. Los Angeles: University of
California, Los Angeles.

Bond, L., Craps, S., and Vermeulen, P. (2017). Memory unbound: tracing the
dynamics of memory studies. New York: Berghahn.

Bowker, G. C. (2005). Memory practices in the sciences. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Caswell, M. (2014). Archiving the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the
Photographic Record in Cambodia. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

Daston, L., editor (2017). Science in the archives: pasts, presents, futures.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gilliland, A. J., McKemmish, S., and Lau, A., editors (2016). Research in the
Archival Multiverse. Melbourne: Monash University Press.

Halbwachs, M. (1992). On collective memory. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Hoskins, A., editor (2018). Digital memory studies: Media pasts in transition.
London: Routledge.

Kosnik, A. D. (2016). Rogue Archives: Digital Cultural Memory and Media Fandom.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Van Dijck, J. (2007). Mediated memories in the digital age. Palo Alto: Stanford
University Press.

#### Sociotechnical Theory

Berry, D. (2011). The philosophy of software: Code and mediation in the digital
age. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bowker, G. C. and Star, S. L. (2000). Sorting things out: Classification and its
consequences. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Brunton, F. (2013). Spam: A shadow history of the Internet. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Chun, W. H. K. (2016). Updating to Remain the Same: Habitual New Media.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Cubitt, S. (2016). Finite Media: Environmental Implications of Digital
Technologies. Durham: Duke University Press.

Hu, T. (2015). A Prehistory of the Cloud. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Dourish, P. (2017). The Stuff of Bits: An Essay on the Materialities of
Information. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Edwards, P. N. (2010). A vast machine: Computer models, climate data, and the
politics of global warming. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Emerson, L. (2014). Reading writing interfaces: From the digital to the
bookbound. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Kittler, F. A. (1999). Gramophone, film, typewriter. Palo Alto: Stanford
University Press.

Galloway, A. R. (2004). Protocol: How control exists after decentralization.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Kelty, C. M. (2008). Two bits: The cultural significance of free software.
Durham: Duke University Press.

Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011). Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Rossiter, N. (2016). Software, Infrastructure, Labor: A Media Theory of
Logistical Nightmares. Oxford: Routledge.

Russell, A. L. (2014). Open standards and the digital age. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

#### Practice Theory

Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Bräuchler, B. and Postill, J. (2010). Theorising media and practice. Bristol:
Berghahn Books.

Foucault, M. (2012). Discipline & punish: The birth of the prison. New York:
Vintage.

Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to
actor-network-theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Law, J. (2002). Aircraft stories: Decentering the object in technoscience.
Durham: Duke University Press.

Schatzki, T. R., Cetina, K. K., and von Savigny, E. (2001). The practice turn in
contemporary theory. Oxford: Routledge.

Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, meaning, and identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

---

### References

