---
layout: post
title: Documenting Reality
tags:
- reading
- algorithms
- archives
---

Something has been troubling me about Cliff Lynch's recent [Stewardship in the
Age of Algorithms] and I think the source can be found early on:

> By "document" here, I mean to capture a comprehensive record, or at least 
> a good approximation, of the present reality that can be consulted today 
> and brought forward into the future [@Lynch:2017].

Even couched in the uncertainty of *approximation* I think this idea of the
archive as documenting *reality* is worrisome. Archives serve purposes. If we
aren't explicit about these purposes, and instead simply talk about how
effectively they document reality, then we're not really doing our job.
Sometimes the purposes that documentation are put to change over time
[@Ketelaar:2005b]. But even then it is important to know the original context,
in order to put those records to new uses. In this paper Lynch moves to carve
out a space that is distinct from the interests of accountability and
transparency, but doesn't *really* describe what this space is.

Lynch also claims to be offering up *pragmatic* approaches several times in this
article. The word is used 11 times by my count. But the key measure of the
pragmatic stance (at least in the [philosophical sense]) is the degree to which
something is *useful*.

> Consider what effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, 
> we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our conception of 
> these effects is the whole of our conception of the object. [@Peirce:1878]

Documenting reality is not a pragmatic enterprise. If you really want to bring
pragmatism into archival work it's important to ask:

* What purposes does the documentation serve *right now*?
* What effects will the documentation have, *right now*?

Once we are clear on answers these questions *then* we can talk about what
purposes the documentation might serve in the future. If we are always reaching
for an archive that attempts to *document reality* then we will remain
frustrated by failure, and worse, we won't really know what we are doing, and
who we are doing it for.

To be fair, Lynch does go on to offer some pragmatic solutions, which are mostly
pulled from @Sandvig:2014. But Sandvig et al are specifically interested in
issues of accountability and transparency. Lynch uses these methods as a
launching off point, but we're not really sure where we're launching off to.

I'm as guilty as anyone for [gesturing] at imaginary future users who will want
to know that *something* happened. But let's face it, it's not a very satisfying
explanation of why we build archives is it? Who is the documentation being
collected for? How is the documentation scoped and why?  It feels like there is
an undercurrent of positivism in Lynch's approach to the problem of archiving in
this age of algorithms, which is at odds with the last 30 years, or more
[@Briet:2006], of archival thinking around documentation and appraisal.

This blog post started when I ran across @Jeurgens:2017 that put Lynch's article
into relief. Jeurgens stresses the need to document algorithms but from a more
theoretical standpoint. I find the connections Jeurgens makes to
governmentality, sociality and the archival concept of appraisal are generative
for thinking about the possible ways of scoping the problem of the archive in
these algorithmic times. He rightly points out that archival concepts themselves
are shifting, as they always have in response to the information technologies we
use.

@Mayer:2011 calls this process *cognitive adjustment* as he thinks about our
[understanding] of permanence and loss of information in computational systems.
Tracing these cognitive shifts, how they both produce, and are the product of,
archival technologies is the work that needs doing. Perhaps, this is where
Lynch's main contribution lies, as he talks about how the nature of computation
and the presence of worldwide networks of information flows call into question
the archival enterprise. Let's not assume that these archival ideas will carry
forward unchanged. Carefully examining and documenting the purposes that
information technologies are put to can help us understand what they mean and
how they are changing.

*Update: [Cassie Findlay] notes [in Twitter] that @Hurley:2005's idea of
parallel provenance has some relevance here, as we consider how archival
concepts are redefined, especially in light of claims to documenting reality.*

[Stewardship in the Age of Algorithms]: http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/8097/6583
[gesturing]: http://mith.umd.edu/introducing-documenting-the-now/
[philosophical sense]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pragmatism
[understanding]: https://inkdroid.org/2018/01/15/delete/
[Cassie Findlay]: https://twitter.com/CassPF
[in Twitter]: https://twitter.com/CassPF/status/960255979299287040

### References
