---
layout: post
title: Routine
tags:
- reading
- philosophy
- practice
---

From @Cohen:2007 which I ran across in @Passi:2017:

> Some of the mystery of routine, and our consequent difficulty in studying 
> it, derives from our lack of good representations for such
> patterns-in-variety, and of good methods to investigate their stability and
> fragility. We have many observations that there can be large variations 
> in circumstances that leave an established pattern relatively undisturbed--as
> when new employees move into their roles and an organizational routine 
> continues with little disruption. This is such a common occurrence that we 
> hardly note it, but long-lasting organizations would be impossible if it
> were not usually reliable. We also have observations that a seemingly small 
> variation in circumstances or behavior can bring a routine grinding to a 
> halt--as when an unnoticed change at Intel from back-and-forth to circular 
> polishing of a production mirror caused a semi-conductor factory to lose
> days of output.
> 
> Perturbations we take to be large (employee turnover) or small (mirror 
> polishing motion) turn out not to have correspondingly large or small effects
> on the realized pattern of action. This is the hallmark of a complex, and 
> probably non-linear, system. But saying this only indicates a general
> direction for what may be a long conceptual journey. (p. 792)

Cohen is reflecting here on his fascination with Dewey's idea of routine, which
can be found in @Dewey:1957. Dewey saw routine not as a mechanical action that
is regularly, or even slavishly, followed. Instead routine is a complex
interplay between habit, cognition and emotion. Dewey's humanistic approach to
routine seems in principle quite similar to ideas around practice today, perhaps
even Bourdieu'sn notion of [habitus]. I first ran across @Dewey:1957 myself when
hearing Steven Jackson talk about his own work on repair, which he traced back
to this book by Dewey. Apparently one of Dewey's last books @Dewey:1938 explores
ways in which routine or habit can be effectively studied--an inquiry into
inquiry. Cohen points out that Bertrand Russell gave Logic a scathing review,
which is pretty much a ringing endorsement for me. This post is just a reminder
to myself to dig into *Logic* at some point.

[habitus]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Habitus_(sociology)

[Logic]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/5214438-logic?from_search=true

### References
