---
layout: post
title: Mutation
tags:
- archives
---
 

This is just a quick note to jot down this quote from @Ketelaar:2005a because of
the way it dispels the idea that the archival record is some fixed thing.
Archival records are [valorized] for their stability and fixity because we think
the archive's integrity depends on them.

> The record is a "mediated and ever-changing construction" [@Cook:2001] ;
> records are "constantly evolving, ever mutating" [@McKemmish:2005], over time
> and space infusing and exhaling what I have called "tacit narratives". These
> are embedded in the activations of the record. Every interaction,
> intervention, interrogation, and interpretation by creator, user, and
> archivist activates the record.  These activations may happen consecutively or
> simultaneously, at different times, in different places and contexts.
> Moreover, as I argued before, any activation is distributed between texts and
> other agents in a network.  The record, "always in a state of becoming", has
> therefore many creators and consequently, many who may claim the record's
> authorship and ownership.

But this valorization comes at a cost because not all archival records exhibit
this characteristic of fixity. This is the case with electronic records, which
are often in flux and motion as they are constantly assembled and reassembled
from heterogenous data sources, onto our screens.

If we define an archive as a place where this fixity *must* reside, then we
fashion a particular type of memory. This view of archival records fails to
recognize the agency of our archival tools, and their relation to us. Ketelaar
actually frames his discussion in terms of [Actor-Network Theory] which is a
method for explicitly examining these relations.

I also like that Ketalaar is referencing McKemmish here because I think the
[Records Continuum] is really built around the idea that the flow of records
takes place in the wider field of record creation, and memory practices. The
fixity or evidentiary nature of records is really just one aspect, and not a
totalizing one that should be allowed to overly determine the archive. Our
technologies for *fixing* the record always shape our archives in particular
ways that obscure and eclipse. Telling these stories, and describing these
relations between archival technologies and memory is what I'm trying to do in
my own work.

[valorized]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valorisation
[Actor-Network Theory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor%E2%80%93network_theory
[Records Continuum]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Records_Continuum_Model

### References
