---
layout: post
title: Continued
tags:
- archives
- appraisal
---

I recently re-read a gem of a paper by Leonard Rapport about the process of
reappraisal, or reviewing an archives holdings and re-evaluating whether they
still need to be retained [@Rapport:1981]. It was written just as the deluge of
data generated by computation was ramping up, but before the explosion of the
Internet and the web had begun. Rapport's argument hinges on the difference
between "permanent" and "continued" preservation. It is the latter that [Federal
Records act of 1950] stipulated:

> The Administrator, whenever it appears to him to be in the public interest,
> is hereby authorized-to accept for deposit with the National Archives of the
> United States the records of any Federal agency or of the Congress of the 
> United States that are determined by the Archivist to have sufficient 
> historical or other value to warrant their continued preservation by the 
> United States Government.

The use of "continued preservation" made it through the various amendments to
the act over time, including Obama's addition of [electronic records] in 2014.

So it's funny we often talk about records going to archives "permanently", and
design systems to enforce this idea. Obviously not all archives are run the same
way as NARA here in the US.  But it is comforting to recognize that the
architects of this system recognized that records couldn't and shouldn't be kept
permanently. Rapport makes a strong and humanistic argument that the cost of
keeping records should always be weighed as best they can against their
perceived use, and that this is an iterative process.

Just a few years later @Bearman:1989 argued, again pretty persuasively, that the
process of appraisal was fundamentally broken in the age of electronic records
because of the staggering increase in volume of records. While he is sympathetic
to Rapport's argument, Bearman says that we can't reappraise because our value
based process for appraisal is itself broken. Reappraising without changing what
it means to appraise would just make the problem many times worse. Instead
Bearman says we need to shift the analysis from the values of records, to the
activities that generate records, and assessing the importance of records to
those activities. Of course this anticipates the work on Macro-Appraisal
[@Cook:2004a] and Documentation Strategies [Saumuels:1991] that was to follow.

It was fun to follow this little thread, but I mostly wanted to blog about
Rapport's article because it closes with this really wonderful and enigmantic
little thought experiment about archives:

> If that does not put a troubled appraiser in a more comfortable frame of
> mind, share with me two apocalyptic visions. In the first it suddenly 
> becomes possible to keep a copy of every single document created, and, 
> for these documents, a perfect, instantaneous retrieval system. In the 
> second, and less blissful, vision the upper atmosphere fills with reverse 
> neutron bombs, heading toward every records repository. These are bombs 
> that destroy records only, not people. They come down and obliterate every 
> record of any sort.
> 
> Keeping these two events in separate parts of your mind, project forward a
> century. How different would the two resultant worlds be? In the first would 
> our descendants, having all the information that it is possible to derive 
> from documents, have, therefore, all knowledge? And if they have all knowledge 
> would they have, therefore, all wisdom?
>
> In the second, lacking the records we have as of this moment, would our 
> descendants wander in a world of anarchy, in a world in which they would 
> be doomed to repeat the errors of the past?
>
> I leave it to you to conjecture as you please. My own guess is that 
> between these two worlds there wouldn't be all that much difference.

Why would there be no difference between these two scenarios? Do you agree?

[Federal Records Act of 1950]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Records_Act

[electronic records]: https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/house-bill/1233
