---
layout: post
title: Factory
tags:
- reading
- marx
- foucault
---

> Factory work exhausts the nervous system to the uttermost; at the same time,
> it does away with the many-sided play of the muscles, and confiscates every
> atom of freedom, both in bodily and in intellectual activity. Even the 
> lightening of the labour becomes an instrument of torture, since the machine
> does not free the worker from the work, but rather deprives the work itself
> of all content. Every kind of capitalist production, in so far as it is not
> only a labour process but also capital's process of valorization, has this 
> in common, but it is not the worker who employs the conditions of his work,
> but rather the reverse, the conditions of work employ the worker. However 
> it is only with the coming of machinery that this inversion first acquires 
> a technical and palpable reality.
>
> @Marx:1990, p. 548

It's not hard to imagine Marx talking about the work we do on the web as we
answer [CAPTCHAs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAPTCHA), like and retweet posts
in social media, and [microworkers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwork)
labor in their browsers.  It's also not difficult to imagine Foucault saying
something very similar when expounding on his idea of
[biopower](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biopower). Marx and Foucault seem to
have a lot more in common than people generally seem to admit.  Perhaps the
political projects that arose around them were quite different, especially in
time, but meanwhile their thought aligns quite nicely in places.

Yes, I'm still working my way through *Capital* and listening to David Harvey's
[online lectures](http://davidharvey.org/reading-capital/) as a podcast on my
commute. It is slow going, but it has been fun to slowly work through it at my
own pace and not for a class or some directed purpose for my own research. But
there are actually quite a few points of intersection, and it's fun to run
across them when Marx is writing in such a different time and place--which I
guess is not so different after all. The scope of his project is truly
remarkable.
