---
layout: post
title: Appraisal in Web Archives
tags:
- writing
- web archives
- appraisal
---

Two days ago I defended my dissertation proposal in the College for Information
Studies at umd.edu where I have been in the PhD program for the last four years.
As I enter my fifth year it feels like it has been a long haul, and I've still
got a significant amount of work ahead of me. But I feel good about how my ideas
have been refined since I wrote my [personal
statement](https://inkdroid.org/2015/08/29/ischool/). This is almost entirely
the work of the people I have been working with at the University of Maryland
both in the iSchool and at MITH. So thanks to them for their time, especially my
committee members: Ricky Punzalan, Kari Kraus, Wayne Lutters, Katrina Fenlon and
Matt Kirschenbaum.

I've been trying to write here about my research process, and have largely
failed at that...although you will find some traces of my thinking here in this
blog. I thought I would share my proposal abstract and then also point out that
you can follow along with my writing process at
[GitHub](https://github.com/edsu/diss) if you really want to see more.

I do think that I need to find a catchier title for the project. Hopefully that
will come in the writing--but if you have any ideas about that or anything
please [get in touch](mailto:ehs@pobox.com).

---

Appraisal in Web Archives

The web is a site of constant breakdown in the form of broken links, failed
business models, unsustainable infrastructure, obsolescence and general neglect.
Some estimate that about a quarter of all links break every 7 years, and even
within highly curated regions of the web, such as scholarly publishing, rates of
link rot can be as high as 50%. Over the past twenty years web archiving
projects at cultural heritage organizations have worked to stem this tide of
loss. However, we still understand quite little about the diversity of actors
involved in web archiving, and how content is selected for web archives. This is
due in large part to how web archiving projects operate out of sight as complex
sociotechnical assemblages at the boundaries between human and automated
processes.

This dissertation explores appraisal practices in web archives from the
perspective of Science and Technology Studies in order to answer two motivating
research questions. 1) How is appraisal currently being enacted in web
archives? 2) How do definitions of what constitutes a web archive relate to the
practice of appraisal? Answering these questions will help information studies
researchers and practitioners better understand the dynamics that shape our
memory of the past that is mediated by the web, and will also inform archival
studies pedagogy. Critical Algorithm and Data Studies provide a theoretical
framework for examining how web archiving systems function as both
computational and cultural objects that participate in a wide variety of social
and political projects. As machine learners increasingly become readers of web
archives the stakes for understanding the dynamics by which these collections
are built could not be higher.

Interviews with web archives practitioners, and a year long field study at a
government agency involved in archiving data from the web, will provide rich
descriptive material for an ethnographic analysis of what current practices
are, and how these practices are shaped by the ontological dimensions of web
archives. Critical Discourse Analysis will be used to analyze interview
transcripts and field notes from participant observation in meetings and in the
work of the archive. In addition, methods drawn from Trace Ethnography will be
used to analyze version control histories, and ticketing systems that have been
used to coordinate and assemble a web archive that challenges our notions of
what constitutes a web archive.

