---
title: Formats
layout: post
tags:
- standards
---


I picked this piece from @Koopman:2019 up from the
[orgorgorgorgorg.org](http://orgorgorgorgorg.org/) reading group at UNC. I'm
marking it here so I remember the idea of thinking about information without at
the same time thinking about communication. The pragmatist in me was initially
skeptical about the idea that there could be information absent people
communicating.  But I think Koopman makes a compelling argument (drawing on
Foucault) that *formats* do work outside of communication, particularly in the
ways that they make us into *subjects*.

> A  media-genealogical approach, thus, prompts an investigation of how 
> information  formats  identity, personhood, or subjectivity. To what extent 
> are we made by the formats of our data? What limits does that formatting set 
> for who we can be and what we can do?

Koopman coins the term of *infopower* (can this really be the first time this is
used) directly echoing Foucault's idea of *biopower*, or technologies for the
control of populations. For Koopman infopower designates the mechanisms by which
we are made into *informational persons*, who are *formatted* by the data
structures that have been deployed for purposes that exceed communication.

It seems like there is a lot in common here with the idea of *legibility*
developed by @Scott:1998, and work around standards [@Lampland:2009], especially
the idea that standards are deployed as *critiques* of the existing landscapes
that they are engineered to alter. I've written a little bit about that
[here](https://inkdroid.org/2018/01/29/standards/)
[before](https://inkdroid.org/2018/02/19/standards/). What Koopman is saying is
that we, as subjects, are part of that landscape that is being altered by
formats. I like the idea of a genealogy of formats, and I think it could be
useful in an archival setting. In some ways it speaks directly to the mechanics
of archives.

### References
