---
layout: post
title: OOP
tags:
- programming
- teaching
---

I recently rewatched this 1997 Alan Kay talk about object-oriented programming
to prep for my class this week where we introduce OOP concepts.

It's really interesting to hear him talk about how the focus on *objects* in the name (which he coined) was a mistake.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oKg1hTOQXoY"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

For Kay (in 1997) OOP was about what lies in between, or
[Ma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ma_%28negative_space%29) (from Japanese) and
less about the objects themselves. Teaching OOP is more like theorizing and
critiquing a philosophy, or way of thinking about the world, than it is about
teaching a specific way of programming.

This reminded me how much of an impact [Richard
Gabriel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_P._Gabriel)'s work made on me as an
aspiring software developer.

<div style="margin: 10p;">
  <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/685486.Patterns_of_Software">
    <img class=" img-responsive center-block" src="/images/patterns.jpg">
  </a>
</div>

Gabriel anticipated for much of the software studies that was to
come. I would lump many of the [Object Oriented
Ontology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_ontology) folks in there
too, but it would be some work to connect those dots. For example Gabriel's
thesis advisor was [Terry
Winograd](https://inkdroid.org/2011/05/02/a-bit-about-scruffiness/), who [drew
on](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/53482.Understanding_Computers_and_Cognition)
who drew on the same Heidegger that folks like
[Harman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graham_Harman),
[Bogost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Bogost) and
[Morton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timothy_Morton) have.  But the thing I
love about Gabriel's work, and the software studies work that really resonates
with me, is that OOP is also deeply about craft and practice--in short, art.

I like that Gabriel permitted himself to make things so that he could think more
clearly about how things were made.

