---
title: In Media Res
layout: post
tags:
- reading
- writing
- research
---

I've been re-reading Bruno Latour's *Reassembling the Social*, which is a book
that landed me in graduate school in the first place, and has been a guiding
text for me since. One of the reasons why I really like the book (other than his
argument what constitutes the social) is that Latour is an excellent writer,
with a sense of humor. It is remarkable because Latour native tongue is French,
but (I believe) he wrote *Reassembling* in English. I wanted to copy this page
because it so aptly characterizes my experience doing field work and the
analysis/writing that I'm in the middle of. Latour humanizes the process of
research, and makes you feel like you are doing ok, even when it feels like you
are not.

> What is an account? It is typically a *text*, a small ream of paper a few
> millimeters thick that is darkened by a laser beam. It may contain 10,000
> words and be read by very few people, often only a dozen or a few hunder if we
> are really fortunate. A 50,000 word thesis might be read by half a dozen
> people (if you are lucky, even your PhD advisor would have read parts of it!)
> and when I say 'read', it does not mean 'understood', 'put to use',
> 'acknowledged', but rather 'perused', 'glanced at', 'alluded to', 'quoted',
> 'shelved somewhere in a pile'. At best, we add an account to all those which
> are simultaneously launched in the domain we have been studying. Of course,
> this study is never complete. We start in the middle of things, *in media
> res*, pressed by our colleagues, pushed by fellowships, starved for money,
> strangled by deadlines. And most of the things we have been studying, we have
> ignored or misunderstood. Action had already started; it will continue when we
> will no longer be around. What we are doing in the field--conducting
> interviews, passing out questionnaires, taking notes and pictures, shooting
> films, leafing through the documentation, clumsily loafing around--is unclear
> to the people with whom we have shared no more than a fleeting moment. What
> the clients (research centers, state agencies, company boards, NGOs) who have
> sent us there expect from us remains cloaked in mystery, so circuitous was the
> road tat led to the choice of this investigator, this topic, this method, this
> site. Even when we are in the midst of things, with our eyes and ears on the
> lookout, we miss most of what has happened. We are told the day after that
> crucial events have taken place, just next door, just a minute before, just
> when we had left exhausted with our tape recorder mute because of some batter
> failure. Even if we work diligently, things don't get better because, after a
> few months, we are sunk in a flood of data, reports, transcripts, tables,
> statistics, and articles. How does one make sense of this mess as it piles up
> on our desks and fills countless disks with data? Sadly, it often *remains* to
> be written and is usually delayed. It rots there as advisors, sponsors, and
> clients are shouting at you and lovers, spouses, and kids are angry at you
> while you rummage about in the dark sludge of data to bring light to the
> world. And when you begin to write in earnest, finally pleased with yourself,
> you have to sacrifice vast amounts of data that cannot fit the in the small
> number of pages allotted to you. How frustrating this whole business of
> studying is.
>
> And yet, is this not the way of all flesh? No matter how grandiose the
> perspective, no matter how scientific the outlook, no matter how tough the
> requirements, no matter how astute the advisor, the result of the inquiry--in
> 99% of the cases--will be a report prepared under immense duress on a topic
> requested by some colleagues for reasons that will remain for the most part
> unexplained. And this is excellent because *there is no better way*.
>
> (pp. 123-4)
