---
layout: post
title: The Journalist of Algorithms
tags:
- writing
- algorithms
- research
---


In case you missed it, there is a lovely interview with [Donald Knuth] over at
the [Artificial Intelligence Podcast]. I subscribe to it in my podcast reader, so
I listened to it...but I've embedded the video below if you prefer to watch
interviews. There's something quite intimate about listening to someone's voice
while riding a bus, or walking down the street...and Knuth's humble, meandering
way of talking and telling stories was a real pleasure to listen to.

I actually haven't finished the whole thing yet, but I've been struck by how
important *writing* is to his work. If you are familiar with [literate
programming] this should really come as no surprise. But hearing him talk about
writing (and reading) *on equal terms* with researching programming was really
quite remarkable.

At one point ([33:56](https://youtu.be/2BdBfsXbST8?t=2036)) Knuth recalls how he
began writing The Art of Computer Programming in 1962, and effectively became a
what he calls a *journalist of algorithms*:

> In 1962 when I started writing down a table of contents, [The Art of
> Computer Programming] wasn't going to be a book about computer programming in
> general. It was going to be a book about how to write compilers. I was asked
> to write a book explaining how to write a compiler.
>
> At that time there were only a few dozen people in the world who had written
> compilers and I happened to be one of them.  I also had some experience
> writing, for the campus newspaper and things like that.
>
> So I said okay great, I'm the only person I know who has written a compiler, but
> hasn't invented any new techniques for writing compilers, and all the other
> people I knew had super ideas...but I couldn't see that they would be able to
> write a book that would describe anybody else's ideas with their own. So I
> could be the journalist, and I could explain what all these cool ideas about
> compiler writing were.

I have by no means read the entirety of TAOCP, I use it mostly as a reference
book. But one thing that is striking to anyone that dips into its pages is the
historical depth of his explanations and citations. I honestly think of Knuth as
more a historian of algorithms than a journalist...but the contemporary nature
of what he was writing about does lend itself to that mode of writing I suppose.
 
<iframe width="700" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2BdBfsXbST8"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[literate programming]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming
[Donald Knuth]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Knuth
[Artificial Intelligence Podcast]: https://lexfridman.com/ai/
