---
title: Pandoc
layout: post
tags:
- software
---

I never got much past dabbling a bit in [Haskell]. But learning about functional
programming (FP), the importance of types, [lazy evaluation], and [declarative
programming] more generally really changed how I approached programming in *any*
language.

Previously I (along with much of the computing industry in the 80s and 90s) had
been kind of taken with object oriented programming (OOP). In OOP there is a
similar attention to types, but things get [kind of weird] when it comes to how
those types get used and orchestrated.

Functional programming starts with the very simple idea of functions which have
a name, can take arguments, and return a value. Functions can use other
functions within them. Functions can be *composed* together, where the return
value of one becomes an argument for another. Things gets really interesting
because in FP languages like Haskell functions are themselves values.  This
means that functions can take other functions as arguments, and can also return
functions.

The difference between FP and OOP gets a bit blurry when you consider that you
can think of values and functions as types of objects. FP languages can
implement OOP, as in the [Common Lisp Object System]. But in FP objects arent't
the center of attention, they are incidental to the operation of functions. I
think FP concepts helped me design software because functions *do* things
whereas objects *are*. It's almost like the shift that comes from seeing the
world less as a set of objects (substances) and more like a set of interrelated
[processes] in motion.

Anyway, all this is a digression because I started this post wanting to say that
as much as I've liked learning about Haskell I never really used it in any
programming projects. But I have used software written in Haskell before, most
notably the amazing [Pandoc]. I wrote my dissertation in [Markdown], and have
written articles in Markdown, even this blog uses Pandoc to generate references.
I've come to appreciate how Markdown frees me from a choice of editor, and lets
me focus on the words. But it wouldn't be possible without a tool like Pandoc
that makes it easy to combine my Markdown text with a database of my citations,
and generate PDF and Word Documents (sometimes EPUBs) and a host of other
formats I haven't fully taken advantage of.

One remarkable thing about Pandoc is it has felt very stable over the years. It
does this one thing (document conversion and generation) very well, and it
hasn't wavered. As I've perused the documentation I've often caught myself
wondering as a side thought, who is this [jgm]? But till today I haven't looked
him up.

It gives me such pleasure to know that jgm is [John MacFarlane], a philosophy
professor at the University of California at Berkeley, who studies the history
and philosophy of logic. Of course he does. It makes me wonder how much of the
stability of Pandoc I experienced as a user comes from the FP approach to
software development that Haskell provides. Another John, John Backus, famously
said in his 1977 Turing Award lecture [@Backus:2007] that FP offers a new more
sustainable approach to computation:

> Conventional programming languages are growing ever more enormous, but not
> stronger. Inherent defects at the most basic level cause them to be both fat
> and weak: their primitive word-at-a-time style of program- ruing inherited
> from their common  ancestor--the von Neumann computer, their close coupling of
> semantics to state transitions, their division of programming into a world of
> expressions and a world of statements, their inability to effectively use
> powerful combining forms for building new programs from existing ones, and
> their lack of useful mathematical properties for reasoning about programs. An
> alternative functional style of programming is founded on the use of combining
> forms for creating programs. Functional programs deal with structured data,
> are often nonrepetitive and nonrecursive, are hierarchically constructed, do
> not name their arguments, and do not require the complex machinery of
> procedure declarations to become generally applicable. Combining forms can use
> high level programs  to build still higher level ones in a style not possible
> in conventional languages.

I don't know if Pandoc is a good example of this or not. But with 345
contributors and 13,578 commits (and counting) it's hard not to see it as a
quiet open source software success story. Now I want to read one of Professor
MacFarlane's books :)

### References

[declarative programming]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Declarative_programming
[kind of weird]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns
[Haskell]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell_(programming_language)
[processes]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_philosophy
[Pandoc]: https://pandoc.org/
[Markdown]: https://www.markdownguide.org/ 
[jgm]: https://github.com/jgm/
[John MacFarlane]: https://www.johnmacfarlane.net/
[lazy evaluation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation
[Common Lisp Object System]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Lisp_Object_System
