---
title: Twitter
layout: post
tags:
- social media
- twitter
---

In April of 2008 I created a Twitter account, and actively used it more or less
until June of 2020. For the first few years it was a lot of fun. I networked
with people around the world, and learned about lots of things that I wouldn't
have otherwise. Somewhere along the way I got a bit lost. I started to pay more
attention to the likes and the retweets, and the follows. It stopped being fun
and random--but I didn't really notice because I was caught up in the stream.

A few months ago I decided that I *needed* to [take a
break](https://twitter.com/edsu/status/1266455129273892864) mostly to get some
writing done on my dissertation. I noticed that I was finding it difficult to
concentrate on my research, and that when I was away from Twitter it got
significantly easier. It's a conundrum in a way because I'm not sure I would
have started a PhD in the first place if I wasn't in conversation with some of
the people I've been able to follow and chat with on Twitter. While some of
these people remain, many of these people have now quietly moved on.

When I took the break I thought I'd be back in September once the heavy lift of
my writing was finished. But honestly, I've felt quite a bit more calm not
constantly checking my notifications, and feeling the urge to drop little notes
documenting my life into Twitter. The stress level of the content on Twitter is
also high: then there's the fear of missing out, and the fear of not reading
everything, and the occasional bouts of envy bubbling up here and there.

Instead of going back to Twitter immediately I somewhat randomly tuned back into
my [social.coop](https://social.coop) Mastodon account. I found people were
still there in the
[fediverse](https://alexschroeder.ch/wiki/2017-11-16_How_to_Mastodon) talking
about things I enjoyed: open source software, left politics, archives, art, and
design. I felt like I was actually learning from people, and *liked* them. The
fediverse feels a bit off tthe beaten track, with all the random instances
people hail from, and the fluidity of people moving around.

So I've decided not to come back to Twitter after all. I'm not going to delete
my account or my posts. I always engaged with Twitter as a form of public
discourse, so I'm going to leave the content I put there as a record of that. I
have a snapshot of my archive which I'm planning on putting online once I've
purged it of some of my personal information which doesn't really belong on the
public web.

I'll probably keep an eye on DMs and respond to notifications when I happen to
notice them. But I'm going to stay off Twitter for day to day communications.  I
do hope you will come and follow me at [social.coop](https://social.coop/@edsu)
-- but hey, no pressure, ok? I'm always at ehs@pobox.com so drop me a line some
time. And clearly I've missed the memo about blogging and will continue to write
here. The World Wide Web is still a good idea friends.

‚úç
