---
layout: post
title: Appraisal Talk in Web Archives
tags:
- archives
- writing
- web
---

I'm deep in writing the final chapters of my dissertation (wish me luck!), but
happened to notice that a recent article that I published in Archivaria is now
not publicly available. I wanted to drop a note here with a [link to the PDF]
which I'm allowed to distribute. The article was available initially because of
some loosening of access that happened during the first months of the
Coronavirus. But it seems that the grip of academic publishing has tightened
again, even while the grip of the Coronavirus has not. Eventually Archivaria make
their back catalog of articles available for free on the web, but until then
here it is.

Summers, E. (2020). [Appraisal Talk in Web Archives]. *Archivaria*, 89 (Spring), 70-102.

Abstract:

The Web is a vast and constantly changing information landscape that by its
very nature seems to resist the idea of the archive. But for the last 20 years,
archivists and technologists have worked together to build systems for doing
just that. While technical infrastructures for performing web archiving have
been well studied, surprisingly little is known about the interactions between
archivists and these infrastructures. How do archivists decide what to archive
from the Web? How do the tools for archiving the Web shape these decisions? This
study analyzes a series of ethnographic interviews with web archivists to
understand how their decisions about what to archive function as part of a
community of practice. It uses critical discourse analysis to examine how the
participants’ use of language enacts their appraisal decision-making processes.
Findings suggest that the politics and positionality of the archive are
reflected in the ways that archivists talk about their network of personal and
organizational relationships. Appraisal decisions are expressive of the
structural relationships of an archives as well as of the archivists’
identities, which form during mentoring relationships. Self-reflection acts as a
key method for seeing the ways that interviewers and interviewees work together
to construct the figured worlds of the web archive. These factors have
implications for the ways archivists communicate with each other and interact
with the communities that they document. The results help ground the encounter
between archival practice and the architecture of the Web.

[Appraisal Talk in Web Archives]: https://inkdroid.org/papers/appraisal-talk.pdf
[link to the pdf]: https://inkdroid.org/papers/appraisal-talk.pdf
