---
title: Seeing Software
layout: post
tags:
- software
- archives
- web
---

Today I presented a paper at the [International Conference on the History of
Records and Archives (ICHORA)] that shared some of the results of my field
study at the National Software Reference Library. The basic gist of the talk is
that appraisal in web archives (at least in the case of the NSRL) is
intrinsically tied to use, but not use in the typical sense, where use is only
conceived in terms of research.

I use Sarah Ahmed's book [What's the Use] and specifically her technique of
examining the "use of use" and the "strange temporalities of use" as an
analytical frame for examining the valuation of archival records. The varieties
of use, misuse and disuse provide a window into how this web archive
participates in a network of actors that discipline digital preservation, law
enforcement, national security and defense.

Since the conference is remote I decided to record my talk, in order to make
sure I timed things properly--I have a tendency to wander. Unfortunately it
seems that recording the talk on Linux and playing it back through Zoom turned
out to be problematic. The slides didn't neatly transition from one to the
other, but left graphic artifacts behind. But luckily the audio worked ok, and
the display in PeerTube is just fine:

<iframe style="margin: 15px;" width="750" height="440" sandbox="allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-popups" src="https://tube.nocturlab.fr/videos/embed/7acc1686-b28e-45db-a26a-af6ddd043adc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This talk actually forms the core of my dissertation defense next week,
assuming the world still exists then. I was a bit surprised that nobody balked
at my claim that appraisal is tied to use, and that records in web archives
have no intrinsic value (e.g. as evidence) unless you consider the use of use.
I choose to interpret this as the happy result of me making a really good case
;-)

[International Conference on the History of Records and Archives (ICHORA)]:
https://ichora2020.com

[What's the Use]: https://www.dukeupress.edu/whats-the-use
