---
title: Digital Curation
tags:
- teaching
- data
layout: post
---

I'm teaching an undergraduate course in digital curation this fall at the
University of Maryland in the College for Information Studies. It's the first
time I've taught digital curation. But I've had the good fortune to be following
in the footsteps of previous instructors like Katrina Fenlon, Adam Kriesberg and
Ricky Punzalan. 

I'll admit it has been a challenge for me to design this class for an
undergraduate audience. From teaching computer programming to undergradates in
the iSchool I know that, unlike masters level students, they are pursing a
degree in information studies because they are interested in careers that
involve data processing, data visualization, security and design in a variety of
contexts, and aren't specifically interested in the cultural heritage sector.
Data curation often gets expressed as something that libraries, museums and
archives are exclusively interested in. But I think most everyone recognizes
that the description and preservation of data is a major concern for all sorts
of communities of practice especially with the increasing use of machine
learning technologies.

I've linked my syllabus [here](https://github.com/edsu/inst341/blob/master/syllabus.md), which is a
little bit of a work in progress as I move chunks of it into Canvas. One thing I
wanted to do, especially as we are all remote this semester, is to provide
enough space for them to explore this content without feeling like they are
being rushed. There are going to be 7 two week modules, where the first week is
time for them to read/discuss with me and each other, and the second week is
time to try out some of the concepts in some coding exercises in Jupyter
notebooks.

The students will already have been exposed to Python programming and the
fundamentals of information organization. My overarching idea is to get them
thinking early on about the social and political aspects of data, and build on
fundamental concepts like files, file formats, metadata and up to concepts like
platforms, community and infrastructure. Hopefully somewhere along the way they
will get bitten by the digital curation bug.

I spent a bit of time thinking about whether to have students use their own
computers to do these exercises, and also whether I should ask them to work at
the command line. I found some good resources for doing digital curation work at
the command line. But the trouble is, not everyone has the same command line,
and I could spend a long amount of time getting people set up, and helping them
throughout the semester (I know this from experience teaching the programming
class). I also know that some students have more resources to get high end
computers, and many are in different states of repair.

After taking a look at the compute resources available at the university I
decided to give [Colab](https://colab.research.google.com) a try this semester
since it offers a significant resources on demand (12GB RAM, 100GB disk), all
available in a pristine VM which you `pip install` into. If you are interested
in the Jupyter notebooks I'll be using stay tuned to the [GitHub
repository](https://github.com/edsu/inst341/) where I will be dropping them over
the course of the semester.

