---
title: Google Scholar Networks and D3
layout: post
tags:
- graphs
- python
- research
---

Back in 2018 [I wrote] a small Python program called [étudier] which scrapes
citation data out of Google Scholar and presented the network as a GEXF file
for use in Gephi. It also wrote the network data out as an HTML file that
included a very rudimentary D3 visualization.

At the time I left a note in the README saying that I was looking for ideas on
how to improve the D3 visualization. A year later I actually got [a pull
request] from Thomas Anderson who had used [another D3 visualization] to modify
the one that was hard coded into étudier.

Thomas' pull request had some good ideas, like zooming and text labels, which
were missing from the first version. But it also seemed to be hacked together
quickly to serve a particular need, so it took me some time to get around to
disentangling a few things, pruning unused code, adding some additional
features, and merging it in. A few too many years later I finished it up and it
is now out as as [v0.1.0](https://pypi.org/project/etudier).

Once you `pip install --upgrade etudier` you can collect a citation network
either from Google Scholar search results, or by examining the citations to
a particular publication. For example here's how I collected the network for
Sherry Ortner's [Theory in Anthropology since the Sixties]

    $ etudier 'https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=17950649785549691519&as_sdt=20000005&sciodt=0,21&hl=en'

I've embedded the resulting `output.html` here using an &lt;iframe&gt;.
(Incidentally this piece by Ortner was very important form my dissertation
research since it was foundational to [practice theory].)

<iframe width="710" height="700" src="/pages/etudier.html"></iframe>

A few things to note about the visualization:

* The size of each node is relative to the *total* number of citations to the
publication (not necessarily visible in the graph).
* The color of each node indicates which [cluster] it belongs to.
* The directed arrow indicates which publication is citing which.
* Hover over a node to see its title and the titles of other nodes it is immediately connected to.
* Click and hold on a node to foreground just connected nodes.
* Double-click a node to open a browser window with the publication in it.
* Drag nodes around to make the network easier to read.
* Zoom in on the image to examine particular parts of the network.
* It's worth reflecting on how important Google's relevance ranking is in shaping the visualization since only some of the citations can be crawled, and the ones that are ranked higher have a higher chance of getting picked up.

This is actually a pretty simple graph, since I ran it with étudier's defaults,
which are to collect just one level of citations and just one page of results
at each level. This means étudier will look at the 10 citations on the page you
supply, and will click into each publication using the *cited by* link to find
the first 10 citations that cite it. Effectively the defaults will pull in up
to 100 citations.

You can get more using the `--depth` and `--pages` command line options. Just be
careful especially with `--depth` since it can exponentially increase the number
of results. Here's what the same Ortner graph looks like with `--depth 2`: 

<iframe width="710" height="700" src="/pages/etudier-large.html"></iframe>

You probably will need to zoom out to see the whole thing. Obviously this is
pushing the limits of what you can do with D3 without customizing things more.
I think the GEXF and GraphML files will probably be most useful if you've
collected a really large network and want to control how it looks and prune
unwanted things.

Hiding in the HTML file is a JSON representation of the network, which could be
useful for other things I guess. If you get a chance to use étudier please [let
me know]. It might be fun to create a little gallery in the repository.

[I wrote]: https://inkdroid.org/2018/03/18/etudier/
[étudier]: https://github.com/edsu/etudier
[a pull request]: https://github.com/edsu/etudier/pull/10
[another D3 visualization]: http://bl.ocks.org/eyaler/10586116
[Theory in Anthropology since the Sixties]: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=20000005&sciodt=0,21&cites=17950649785549691519&scipsc=
[practice theory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Practice_theory
[cluster]: https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.community.modularity_max.greedy_modularity_communities.html
[let me know]: mailto:ehs@pobox.com
