---
date: 2021-02-26 17:31:03
layout: post
title: Recovering Foucault
tags:
- archives
- philosophy
---


I've been enjoying reading David Macey's [biography] of Michel Foucault, that
was republished in 2019 by Verso. [Macey] himself is an interesting figure,
both a scholar and an activist who took leave from academia to do translation
work and to write this biography and others of [Lacan] and [Fanon]. 

One thing that struck me as I'm nearing the end of Macey's book is the
relationship between Foucault and archives. I think Foucault has become
emblematic of a certain brand of literary analysis of "the archive" that is far
removed from the research literature of archival studies, while using "the
archive" as a metaphor [@Caswell:2016a]. I've spent much of my life working in
libraries and digital preservation, and now studying and teaching about them
from the perspective of practice, so I am very sympathetic to this critique. It
is perhaps ironic that the disconnect between these two bodies of research is
a difference in [discourse] which Foucault himself brought attention to.

At any rate, the thing that has struck me while reading this biography is how
much time Foucault himself spent working in libraries and archives. Here's
Foucault in his own words talking about his thesis:

> In *Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique* I wished to determine what could
be known about mental illness in a given epoch ... An object took shape for me:
the knowledge invested in complex systems of institutions. And a method became
imperative: rather than perusing ... only the library of scientific books, it
was necessary to consult a body of archives comprising decrees, rules hospital
and prison registers, and acts of jurisprudence. It was in the [Arsenal] or the
[Archives Nationales] that I undertook the analysis of a knowledge whose visible
body is neither scientific nor theoretical discourse, nor literature, but
a daily and regulated practice.  [@Macey:2019, p. 94]

Foucault didn't simply *use* archives for his research: understanding the processes and practices of archives were integral to his method. Even though the theory and practice of libraries and archives are quite different given their different functions and materials, they are often lumped together as a convenience in the same buildings. Macey blurs them a little bit, in sections like this where he talks about how important libraries were to Foucault's work:

> Foucault required access to Paris for a variety of reasons, not least because he was also teaching part-time at ENS. The putative thesis he had begun at the Fondation Thiers – and which he now described to Polin as being on the philosophy of psychology – meant that he had to work at the Bibliothèque Nationale and he had already become one of its habitues. For the next thirty years, Henri Labrouste’s great building in the rue de Richelieu, with its elegant pillars and arches of cast iron, would be his primary place of work. His favourite seat was in the hemicycle, the small, raised section directly opposite the entrance, sheltered from the main reading room, where a central aisle separates rows of long tables subdivided into individual reading desks. The hemicycle affords slighty more quiet and privacy. For thirty years, Foucault pursued his research here almost daily, with occasional forays to the manuscript department and to other libraries, and contended with the Byzantine cataloguing system: two incomplete and dated printed catalogues supplemented by cabinets containing countless index cards, many of them inscribed with copperplate handwriting. Libraries were to become Foucault’s natural habitat: ‘those greenish institutions where books accumulate and where there grows the dense vegetation of their knowledge’ 

There's a metaphor for you: libraries as vegetation :) It kind of reminds me of
some recent work looking at decentralized web technologies in terms of
[mushrooms]. But I digress.

I really just wanted to note here that the erasure of archival studies from
humanities research about "the archive" shouldn't really be attributed to
Foucault, whose own practice centered the work of libraries and archives.
Foucault wasn't just writing about an abstract archive, he was practically
living out of them. As someone who has worked in libraries and archives I can
appreciate how power users (pun intended) often knew aspects of the holdings
and intricacies of their their management better than I did. Archives, when
they are working, are always collaborative endeavours, and the important thing
is to recognize and attribute the various sides of that collaboration.


*PS. Writing this blog post led me to dig up a few things I want to read
[@Radford:2015 ; @Eliassen:2010].*

### References

[biography]: https://www.versobooks.com/books/2865-the-lives-of-michel-foucault
[Lacan]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6235075-lacan-in-contexts
[Fanon]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/66938.Frantz_Fanon
[discourse]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discourse
[Arsenal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bibliothèque_de_l'Arsenal
[Archives Nationales]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archives_Nationales_(France)
[mushrooms]: https://mycelial.technology/fungi/design-patterns
[Macey]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Macey
