---
date: 2021-02-19 20:57:01
layout: post
title: Teaching OOP in the Time of COVID
tags:
- programming
- teaching
---


<img title="An image from Christopher Alexander's book A Patter Language" class="img-responsive" src="/images/pattern-language.jpg">

I've been teaching a section of the Introduction to Object Oriented Programming
at the UMD College for Information Studies this semester. It's difficult for
me, and for the students, because we are remote due to the Coronavirus
pandemic. The class is largely asynchronous, but every week I've been holding
two synchronous live coding sessions in Zoom to discuss the material and the
exercises. These have been fun because the students are sharp, and haven't been
shy about sharing their screen and their VSCode session to work on the details.
But students need quite a bit of self-discipline to move through the material,
and probably only about 1/4 of the students take advantage of these live
sessions.

I'm quite lucky because I'm working with a set of lectures, slides and
exercises that have been developed over the past couple of years by other
instructors: Josh Westgard, Aric Bills and Gabriel Cruz. You
can see some of the public facing materials
[here](https://umd-ischool-inst326.github.io/inst326-public/). Having this
backdrop of content combined with Severance's excellent (and free) [Python for
Everybody](https://www.py4e.com/book) has allowed me to focus more on my live
sessions, on responsive grading, and to also spend some time crafting
additional exercises that are geared to this particular moment.

This class is in the College for Information Studies and not in the Computer
Science Department, so it's important for the students to not only learn how to
use a programming language, but to understand programming as a social activity,
with real political and material effects in the world. Being able to read,
understand, critique and talk about code and its documentation is just as
important as being able to write it. In practice, out in the "real world" of
open source software I think these aspects are arguably *more*
important.

One way I've been trying to do this in the first few weeks of class is to craft
a sequence of exercises that form a narrative around Coronavirus testing and
data collection to help remind the students of the basics of programming:
variables, expressions, conditionals, loops, functions, files.

<a href="https://www.iaea.org/bulletin/infectious-diseases/how-is-the-covid-19-virus-detected-using-real-time-rt-pcr"><img class="img-responsive" src="/images/rt-pcr.png"></a> 

In the [first exercise](https://umd-ischool-inst326.github.io/inst326-public/modules/module01/exercises/exercise01_covid_testing.html)
we imagined a very simple data entry program that needed to record results of
Real-time polymerase chain reaction tests (RT-PCR). I gave them the program and
described how it was *supposed* to work, and asked them describe (in English)
any problems that they noticed and to submit a version of the program with
problems fixed. I also asked them to reflect on a request from their boss about
adding the collection of race, gender and income information. The goal here was
to test their ability to read the program and write English about it while also
demonstrating a facility for modifying the program. Most importantly I wanted
them to think about how inputs such as race or gender have questions about
categories and standards behind them, and weren't simply a matter of syntax.

The [second
exercise](https://umd-ischool-inst326.github.io/inst326-public/modules/module02/exercises/exercise06.html)
builds on the first by asking them to adjust the revised program to be able to
save the data in a very particular format. Yes, in the first exercise the data
is stored in memory and printed to the screen in aggregate at the end. The
scenario here is that the Department of Health and Human Services has assumed
the responsibility for COVID test data collection from the Centers for Disease
Control. Of course this [really
happened](https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/01/hhs-hospitalization-pandemic-data/617725/),
but the data format I chose was completely made up (maybe we will be working
with some real data at the end of the semester if I continue with this theme).
The goal in this exercise was to demonstrate their ability to read another
program and fit a function into it. The students were given a working program
that had a save_results() function stubbed out. In addition to submitting their
revised code I asked them to reflect on some limitations of the data format
chosen, and the data processing pipeline that it was a part of.

And in the [third
exercise](https://umd-ischool-inst326.github.io/inst326-public/modules/module03/exercises/exercise_covid_testing.html)
I asked them to imagine that this lab they were working in had a scientist who
discovered a problem with some of the thresholds for acceptable testing, which
required an update to the program from Exercise 2, and also a test suite to
make sure the program was behaving properly. In addition to writing the tests
I asked them to reflect on what functionality was not being tested that
probably should be.

This alternation between writing code and writing prose is something I started
doing as part of a [Digital
Curation](https://inkdroid.org/2020/09/20/teaching-digital-curation/) class.
I don't know if this dialogical or perhaps dialectical, approach is something
others have tried. I should probably do some research to see. In my last class
I alternated week by week: one week reading and writing code, the next week
reading and writing prose. But this semester I've stayed focused on code, but
required the reading and writing of code as well as prose about code in the
same week. I hope to write more about how this goes, and these exercises as
I go. I'm not sure if I will continue with the Coronavirus data examples. One
thing I'm sensitive to is that my students themselves are experiencing the
effects of the Coronavirus, and may want to escape it just for a bit in their
school work. Just writing in the open about it here, in addition to the weekly
meetings I've had with Aric, Josh and Gabriel has been very useful.

Speaking of those meetings. I learned today from Aric that tomorrow (February
20th, 2021) is the 30th anniversary of Python's first public release! You can
see this reflected in [this
timeline](https://python-history.blogspot.com/2009/01/brief-timeline-of-python.html).
This v0.9.1 release was the first release Guido van Rossum made outside of CWI
and was made on the Usenet newsgroup alt.sources where it is split out into
chunks that need to be reassembled. Back in 2009 Andrew Dalke
[located](http://www.dalkescientific.com/writings/diary/archive/2009/03/27/python_0_9_1p1.html)
a and repackaged these sources in Google Groups which acquired alt.sources as
part of DejaNews in 2001. But if you look at the time stamp on the [first part
of the release](https://groups.google.com/g/alt.sources/c/O2ZSq7DiOwM) you can
see that it was made February 19, 1991 (not February 20). So I'm not sure if
the birthday is actually today.

I sent this little note out to my students with this wonderful two part oral
history that the Computer History Museum did with Guido van Rossum a couple
years ago. I turns out Both of his parents were atheists and pacifists. His dad
went to jail because he refused to be conscripted into the military. That and
many more details of his background and thoughts about the evolution of Python
can be found in these delightful interviews:

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Pzkdci2HDpU" frameborder="0"
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/y-Yetu20snM" frameborder="0"
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Happy Birthday Python!




