---
layout: post
title: Why I don't use Copilot
tags:
- programming
- artificial-intelligence
-
---

*TL;DR Don't install Copilot.*

---

[GitHub Copilot] is a technology that is designed to help you write code, kind of like your partner in [pair programming]. But, you know, it's not an actual person. It's "A.I."--whatever that means.

In principle this sounds like it might actually be a good thing right? I know several people, who I respect, that use it as part of their daily work. I've heard [smart people] say AI coding assistants like Copilot will democratize programming, by making it possible for more people to write code, and automate the drudgery out of their lives. I'm not convinced.

Here's why I don't use Copilot (or ChatGPT) to write code:

1. Copilot's suggestions are based on a corpus of open source code in Github, but the suggestions do not mention where the code came from, and what the license is. GitHub is stealing and selling intellectual property.
2. Copilot lets you write code *faster*. I don't think more code is a good thing. The more code there is, the more code there is to maintain. Minimalism in features is usually a good thing too. Less really is more.
3. As more and more programmers use Copilot it creates conservativism in languages and frameworks that prevents people from creating and learning new ways of doing things. Collectively, we get even more stuck in our ways and biases. Some of the biases encoded into LLMs are things that we are actively trying to [change].
4. Developers become dependent on Copilot for intellectual work. Actually, maybe *addicted* is a better word here. The same could be (and was) said about the effect of search engines on software development work (e.g. Googling error messages). But the difference is search results need to be interpreted, and the resulting web pages have important context that you often need to understand. This is work that Copilot optimizes away and truncates our knowledge in the process.
5. Copilot costs money. It doesn't cost tons of money (for a professional person in the USA) but it could be significant for some. Who does it privilege? Also, it could change (see point 4). Remember who owns this thing.
6. How much [energy] does it take to run Copilot as millions of developers outsource their intellectual work to its LLM infrastructure? Is this massive centralization and enclosure really progress in computing? Or is it a [step backwards] as we try to reduce our energy use as a species?
7. What does Copilot see of the code in your editor? Does it use your code as context for the prompt? What does it store, and remember, and give to others? Somebody has probably looked into this, but if they have it is always up for revision. Just out of principle I don't want my editor sending my code somewhere else without me intentionally doing it.
8. Working with others who use Google Copilot makes my job harder, since they sometimes don't really understand the details of why the code is written a particular way. Over time Copilot code can mix idioms, styles and approaches, in ways that the developer doesn't really understand or even recognize. This makes maintenance harder.

As far as I can tell the only redeeming qualities of Copilot are:

1. Copilot encourages you to articulate and describe a problem as written prose before starting to write code. You don't need Copilot for this. Maybe keep a work journal? Maybe use your issue tracker? Use [text] to communicate with other people.
2. Copilot is more interactive than a [rubber duck]. But, it turns out *Actual People* are even more interactive and surprising. Reach out to other professionals and make some friends. Go to workshops and conferences.
3. Copilot makes me think critically about machine learning technology, my profession and its place in the world.

Maybe my thinking on this will change. But I doubt it. I'm on the older side for a software developer, and (hopefully) will retire some day. Maybe people like me are on the way out, and writing code with Copilot and ChatGPT is the future. I really hope not.

But some good news: you can still uninstall it--from your computer, and from your life.

[GitHub Copilot]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GitHub_Copilot
[pair programming]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pair_programming
[rubber duck]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging
[smart people]: https://changelog.com/podcast/534
[change]: https://www.wired.com/story/tech-confronts-use-labels-master-slave/
[text]: https://graydon2.dreamwidth.org/193447.html
[energy]: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3442188.3445922
[step backwards]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/06/05/chatgpt-hidden-cost-gpu-compute/
