---
layout: post
title: Curves on a Coordinate Axis
tags:
- reading
---

The narrator, in Tokarczuk's [Flights](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flights_(novel)), explains their difficulty in studying psychology, which I think is also a good commentary on the difficulty of layering quantitative methods over qualitative ones, and the tyranny of categories more generally:

> How was I supposed to analyze others when it was hard enough for me to get
> through all those tests? Personality diagnostics, surveys, multiple columns
> on multiple-choice questions all struck me as too hard. I noticed this
> handicap of mine right away, which is why at university, whenever we were
> analyzing each other for practice, I would give all of my answers at random,
> whatever happened to occur to me. I'd wind up with the strangest personality
> profiles--curves on a coordinate axis. "Do you believe that the best decision
> is also the decision that is easiest to change?" Do I believe? What kind of
> decision? Change? When? Easiest how? "When you walk into a room, do you tend
> to head for the middle or the edges?" What room? And when? Is the room empty,
> or are there plush red couches in it? What about the windows? What kind of
> view do they have? The book question: Would I rather read one that go to a
> party, or does it also depend on what kind of book it is and what kind of
> party?
> 
> What a methodology! It is tacitly assumed that people don't know
> themselves, but that if you furnish them with questions that are smart
> enough, they'll be able to figure themselves out. They pose themselves a
> question, and they give themselves an answer. And they'll inadvertently
> reveal to themselves that secret they knew nothing of till now. 
> 
> And there is that other assumption, which is terribly dangerous--that we are
> constant, and that our reactions can be predicted. [@Tokarczuk:2019, 14-15]

It reminds me of a poem by another Polish Nobel Prize winner, Wisława Szymborska's [A Word on Statistics](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/149909/a-word-on-statistics). We can unlock new understanding with words, but we need to enter into them.


### References
