---
layout: post
title: Copying Spinoza 
tags:
- til
- philosophy
---
 
I've run into [Spinoza] a few times, sometimes in unexpected places like [Joyful Militancy], but I've not yet spent any time reading his work. He popped up in a recent Between the Covers [podcast] interview with [Madeleine Thien] about her new book [The Book of Records]. You'll have to listen to the interview, or read the book, to get a sense of how the book works, but it's my understanding that the main character is a refugee, and yet was able to bring with her three slim books from a series called *The Great Lives of Voyagers*, one of which is about Spinoza, the others being about Du Fu and Hannah Arendt. I believe that readings of these fictional books form part of The Book of Records.

During the interview Thien was asked about the importance of these stories, and friendships to her work as a writer...not only friendships with contemporaries, but across time as well.

> It’s certainly true when I placed all the stories side by side, or as they began to weave through each other, that it became clear that all of them are at times, many times, sometimes, saved by another, and none of their work would reach us had these acts of friendship not occurred. And Moriel asked about that idea of friendship across the centuries between the living and the dead. I was always struck by Hannah Arendt writing about Rahel Varnhagen and saying she was my best friend even though she had died a hundred years ago before her. I often felt this with the three figures who were moving around in the Sea, that they were amazed that we wanted to sit with them, even if we didn’t always agree with them, even if we might have quite serious critiques of some of their ideas. But even then, the desire to value the teacher, to value the teaching, and to understand what it was that each of us might be looking for each time we sit with a text, with a person, with another human being, *I only really feel like I was with Spinoza when I, over many months, copied up Ethics.* I understood then the way the geometry would work on a person’s mind, that it is such a step-by-step process, that text. One thing really must be understood before one moves to the next proposition. One has to draw the angles of the triangle and the measurements and understand what a triangle is before one can begin to “constellate” it with other things. That’s very much how Ethics works. It is this seed, that everything that it contains is in it from its first axioms, its first propositions, and you can kind of unfold them and see how that all works. 

This idea of *copying* Spinoza's Ethics in an effort to form an understanding and a friendship with him is compelling: to get a copy of Ethics, and a blank notebook, and just start copying it out. It's my understanding that the text takes shape in the form of axioms and propositions that draw on geometry, in order to propose a "human geometry"? Of all the maths that I needed to do in school it was geometric proofs that I always got the most enjoyment from. This made me think it would be fun to try do this copying practice with others, to meet and discuss, and share our notebooks and thoughts? But then again, I imagine if it took Thien months to do the copying it would take me *much* longer...so perhaps it would be best to just work at my own pace, when I can, without the peer pressure?

Another thing I learned while reading about Spinoza's [Ethics, Demonstrated in Geometric Order] on Wikipedia is that the first translation into English was done by [George Eliot] in 1883, and it was left unpublished until almost a hundred years later. Spinoza wrote the book over 14 years and it was only published after he died. According to Thien, it took her 9 years to write The Book of Records. In this age of move fast and break things, the idea of doing something restorative, over the course of years, is maybe what appeals to me most.

[Joyful Militancy]: https://joyfulmilitancy.com/
[podcast]: https://tinhouse.com/podcast/madeleine-thien-the-book-of-records/
[The Book of Records]: https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-book-of-records-madeleine-thien/21798601
[Spinoza]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baruch_Spinoza
[Madeleine Thien]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madeleine_Thien
[Ethics, Demonstrated in Geometric Order]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spinoza%27s_Ethics
[George Eliot]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Eliot
