---
layout: post
title: Ruins
tags:
- quote
- reading
- permacomputing
- practice
---

I recently finished [At Work in the Ruins] by [Dougald Hine] (co-author of the [The Dark Mountain Manifesto]). I aim to re-read it after it has sunk in a bit more. The arc of the book reminds me a bit of Bruno Latour's thinking, in that it seems to make the axis of left/right political debates more two (or three) dimensional. In part, the book reflects on what we can learn from the response to the COVID19 pandemic, when thinking about climate change, and the unsustainable/extractive economies and ways of living in the west. I found some of the ideas challenging at first, but once I went through it, I found I wanted to return to the beginning.

The book concludes with four ways of working in the ruins, which I wanted to note here mostly as a reminder to myself:

> The first kind of work that makes sense is to salvage the good that may be taken with us from the ruins of the world that is ending. Among the tangled legacies of modernity, there are gifts that we would not gladly leave behind, so this is the attempt to bring with us what we are able to carry.
>
> The second kind of work is to mourn the good that cannot be taken with us. There is no need to settle where the boundary lies between what can be saved and what is to be mourned; you may answer that question differently to me and only time will tell which of us was right, but this still leaves us with work to do in the meanwhile. Part of the work of mourning is to tell the stories of the good things that couldn't be saved, for those stories can be taken with us and they may turn out to be seeds.
>
> The third kind of work involves discernment: notice the things within our ways of living that were never as good as we told ourselves they were and the chance we are being given to walk away from these. It is the strange gift of a time of endings to bring into view the gap between the things we are trying to do and the ways we went about doing them around here lately. Make use of this gift.
>
>The fourth kind of work is to look for the dropped threads, the moments earlier in the story that have something to tell us. The way of life that is ending had a beginning, and other ways were ending in that moment or being pushed to the edges. So look for the skills or practices or knowledges that have been marked as extinct and obsolete, for some of these may yet make all the difference. There is no going back - but there are dropped threads that can be woven into the onward story.

These strategies remind me quite a bit of the praxis of [permacomputing]--determining what parts of the computing project can be useful to preserve, and what to let go of. I also identify with the fourth kind of work. As I've gotten older I've noticed that I gravitate towards finding value in how older ideas, that may have fallen out of fashion or come under criticism, have relevance and utility in the present, especially because of the way we can learn from the particular ways that they failed, or fell short.

[The Dark Mountain Manifesto]: https://inkdroid.org/2025/06/05/dark-mountain/
[permacomputing]: https://inkdroid.org/2025/08/23/permacomputing/
[At Work in the Ruins]: https://www.chelseagreen.com/product/at-work-in-the-ruins/
[Dougald Hine]: https://dougald.nu/


