---
layout: post
title: Seminar Week 4
tags:
- inst888
- study
---

Here are some things we were supposed to keep in mind for this week's readings:

* What problem or research question does it address? Is that an important problem/question?
* What is the research contribution?
* Is the overall research approach used (e.g., lit survey, interview study, experiment) appropriate?
* Are there any threats to the validity of the research? For example, the sampling method was for the researcher to ask all their friends to participate (let's hope we don't see this!).
* Is the research properly grounded in past work?
* Are there any presentation issues?

@Ali:2007

@Crystal:2004

@Oulasvirta:2003

This study is built upon a useful foundation of existing research on bodystorming, and seems to provide a useful introduction to the concept. It also usefully highlights through concrete examples how bodystorming is different from brainstorming. The goal of the study seems to be to be explore two hypotheses, that are introduced at the end of the paper (I think they should've been included earlier): 

1. to speed up the design process
2. to increase awareness of contextual factors in design

The authors mentioned a third hypothesis, which was to evaluate whether bodystorming on site provided immediate feedback about design ideas. But to me this seemed like a very minor variation on the speed of the design process.

They attempted to study these questions by analyzing the designs generated by 4 different case studies where bodystorming was used and a more traditional brainstorming case study. The setting of the bodystorming was varied: on site, similar site, office space, office space with acting. It also seemed like different types of documentation (user stories and design questions) were used in each scenario. This seemed to be changing more than one variable, and complicating the ability to draw conclusions. The authors mention that the results were somewhat complicated because designs from one of the bodystorming sessions seemed to inform other sessions. This was strange because they mention elsewhere that the case studies included different participants; but they couldn't be all different if this sort of learning took place?

The findings themselves were inconclusive, and admittedly somewhat shallow. Although some of the anecdotes regarding site accessibility, level of exhaustion, inspiration and memorability seem like they could be fruitful to explore in a more controlled manner. It felt like this study was trying to do an experiment, but really did a much better job of presenting the ideas of bodystorming in the context of the literature, and providing a useful set of case studies to delineate how it could be used.